<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>History of European Morals From Augustus to Charlemagne (Vol. 2 of 2)</title>
      <author><name reg="Lecky, William Edward Hartpole">William Edward Hartpole Lecky</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="9">Edition 9</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>April 15, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">39535</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-04-25">April 15, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">History of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">European Morals</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">From Augustus to Charlemagne</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">William Edward Hartpole Lecky, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Ninth Edition</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Two Volumes</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. 2.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Longmans, Green, And Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1890</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. From Constantine To Charlemagne.</head>

<p>
Having in the last chapter given a brief, but I trust not
altogether indistinct, account of the causes that ensured the
triumph of Christianity in Rome, and of the character of the
opposition it overcame, I proceed to examine the nature of
the moral ideal the new religion introduced, and also the
methods by which it attempted to realise it. And at the
very outset of this enquiry it is necessary to guard against a
serious error. It is common with many persons to establish
a comparison between Christianity and Paganism, by placing
the teaching of the Christians in juxtaposition with corresponding
passages from the writings of Marcus Aurelius or
Seneca, and to regard the superiority of the Christian over
the philosophical teaching as a complete measure of the moral
advance that was effected by Christianity. But a moment's
reflection is sufficient to display the injustice of such a conclusion.
The ethics of Paganism were part of a philosophy.
The ethics of Christianity were part of a religion. The first
were the speculations of a few highly cultivated individuals
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
and neither had nor could have had any direct influence upon
the masses of mankind. The second were indissolubly connected
with the worship, hopes, and fears of a vast religious
system, that acts at least as powerfully on the most ignorant
as on the most educated. The chief objects of Pagan religions
were to foretell the future, to explain the universe, to avert
calamity, to obtain the assistance of the gods. They contained
no instruments of moral teaching analogous to our institution
of preaching, or to the moral preparation for the reception of
the sacrament, or to confession, or to the reading of the Bible,
or to religious education, or to united prayer for spiritual
benefits. To make men virtuous was no more the function
of the priest than of the physician. On the other hand, the
philosophic expositions of duty were wholly unconnected
with the religious ceremonies of the temple. To amalgamate
these two spheres, to incorporate moral culture with religion,
and thus to enlist in behalf of the former that desire to enter,
by means of ceremonial observances, into direct communication
with Heaven, which experience has shown to be one of the
most universal and powerful passions of mankind, was among
the most important achievements of Christianity. Something
had, no doubt, been already attempted in this direction.
Philosophy, in the hands of the rhetoricians, had become
more popular. The Pythagoreans enjoined religious ceremonies
for the purpose of purifying the mind, and expiatory
rites were common, especially in the Oriental religions. But
it was the distinguishing characteristic of Christianity that
its moral influence was not indirect, casual, remote, or spasmodic.
Unlike all Pagan religions, it made moral teaching a
main function of its clergy, moral discipline the leading object
of its services, moral dispositions the necessary condition of
the due performance of its rites. By the pulpit, by its ceremonies,
by all the agencies of power it possessed, it laboured
systematically and perseveringly for the regeneration of mankind.
Under its influence, doctrines concerning the nature
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
of God, the immortality of the soul, and the duties of man,
which the noblest intellects of antiquity could barely grasp,
have become the truisms of the village school, the proverbs
of the cottage and of the alley.
</p>

<p>
But neither the beauty of its sacred writings, nor the
perfection of its religious services, could have achieved this
great result without the introduction of new motives to
virtue. These may be either interested or disinterested, and
in both spheres the influence of Christianity was very great.
In the first, it effected a complete revolution by its teaching
concerning the future world and concerning the nature of
sin. The doctrine of a future life was far too vague among
the Pagans to exercise any powerful general influence, and
among the philosophers who clung to it most ardently it
was regarded solely in the light of a consolation. Christianity
made it a deterrent influence of the strongest kind. In
addition to the doctrines of eternal suffering, and the lost
condition of the human race, the notion of a minute personal
retribution must be regarded as profoundly original. That
the commission of great crimes, or the omission of great
duties, may be expiated hereafter, was indeed an idea familiar
to the Pagans, though it exercised little influence over their
lives, and seldom or never produced, even in the case of the
worst criminals, those scenes of deathbed repentance which
are so conspicuous in Christian biographies. But the Christian
notion of the enormity of little sins, the belief that all the
details of life will be scrutinised hereafter, that weaknesses
of character and petty infractions of duty, of which the
historian and the biographer take no note, which have no
perceptible influence upon society, and which scarcely elicit a
comment among mankind, may be made the grounds of
eternal condemnation beyond the grave, was altogether unknown
to the ancients, and, at a time when it possessed all
the freshness of novelty, it was well fitted to transform the
character. The eye of the Pagan philosopher was ever fixed
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
upon virtue, the eye of the Christian teacher upon sin. They
first sought to amend men by extolling the beauty of holiness;
the second by awakening the sentiment of remorse.
Each method had its excellences and its defects. Philosophy
was admirably fitted to dignify and ennoble, but altogether
impotent to regenerate, mankind. It did much to encourage
virtue, but little or nothing to restrain vice. A relish or
taste for virtue was formed and cultivated, which attracted
many to its practice; but in this, as in the case of all our
other higher tastes, a nature that was once thoroughly vitiated
became altogether incapable of appreciating it, and the transformation
of such a nature, which was continually effected by
Christianity, was confessedly beyond the power of philosophy.<note place='foot'>There is a remarkable passage
of Celsus, on the impossibility of
restoring a nature once thoroughly
depraved, quoted by Origen in his
answer to him.</note>
Experience has abundantly shown that men who are wholly
insensible to the beauty and dignity of virtue, can be convulsed
by the fear of judgment, can be even awakened to
such a genuine remorse for sin as to reverse the current of
their dispositions, detach them from the most inveterate
habits, and renew the whole tenor of their lives.
</p>

<p>
But the habit of dilating chiefly on the darker side of human
nature, while it has contributed much to the regenerating
efficacy of Christian teaching, has not been without its disadvantages.
Habitually measuring character by its aberrations,
theologians, in their estimates of those strong and passionate
natures in which great virtues are balanced by great failings,
have usually fallen into a signal injustice, which is the more
inexcusable, because in their own writings the Psalms of
David are a conspicuous proof of what a noble, tender, and
passionate nature could survive, even in an adulterer and a
murderer. Partly, too, through this habit of operating
through the sense of sin, and partly from a desire to show
that man is in an abnormal and dislocated condition, they
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
have continually propounded distorted and degrading views
of human nature, have represented it as altogether under the
empire of evil, and have sometimes risen to such a height of
extravagance as to pronounce the very virtues of the heathen
to be of the nature of sin. But nothing can be more certain
than that that which is exceptional and distinctive in human
nature is not its vice, but its excellence. It is not the sensuality,
cruelty, selfishness, passion, or envy, which are all
displayed in equal or greater degrees in different departments
of the animal world; it is that moral nature which enables
man apparently, alone of all created beings, to classify his
emotions, to oppose the current of his desires, and to aspire
after moral perfection. Nor is it less certain that in civilised,
and therefore developed man, the good greatly preponderates
over the evil. Benevolence is more common than cruelty;
the sight of suffering more readily produces pity than joy;
gratitude, not ingratitude, is the normal result of a conferred
benefit. The sympathies of man naturally follow heroism
and goodness, and vice itself is usually but an exaggeration
or distortion of tendencies that are in their own nature perfectly
innocent.
</p>

<p>
But these exaggerations of human depravity, which have
attained their extreme limits in some Protestant sects, do not
appear in the Church of the first three centuries. The sense
of sin was not yet accompanied by a denial of the goodness
that exists in man. Christianity was regarded rather as a
redemption from error than from sin,<note place='foot'>This is well shown by Pressensé in his <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Trois premiers
Siècles</hi>.</note> and it is a significant
fact that the epithet <q>well deserving,</q> which the Pagans
usually put upon their tombs, was also the favourite inscription
in the Christian catacombs. The Pelagian controversy,
the teaching of St. Augustine, and the progress of asceticism,
gradually introduced the doctrine of the utter depravity of
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
man, which has proved in later times the fertile source of
degrading superstition.
</p>

<p>
In sustaining and defining the notion of sin, the early
Church employed the machinery of an elaborate legislation.
Constant communion with the Church was regarded as of the
very highest importance. Participation in the Sacrament
was believed to be essential to eternal life. At a very
early period it was given to infants, and already in the
time of St. Cyprian we find the practice universal in the
Church, and pronounced by at least some of the Fathers to
be ordinarily necessary to their salvation.<note place='foot'>See a great deal of information
on this subject in Bingham's
<hi rend='italic'>Antiquities of the Christian Church</hi>
(Oxford, 1853), vol. v. pp. 370-378.
It is curious that those very
noisy contemporary divines who
profess to resuscitate the manners
of the primitive Church, and
who lay so much stress on the
minutest ceremonial observances,
have left unpractised what was undoubtedly
one of the most universal,
and was believed to be one
of the most important, of the institutions
of early Christianity.
Bingham shows that the administration
of the Eucharist to infants
continued in France till the twelfth
century.</note> Among the adults
it was customary to receive the Sacrament daily, in some
churches four times a week.<note place='foot'>See Cave's <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Christianity</hi>,
part i. ch. xi. At first the
Sacrament was usually received
every day; but this custom soon declined
in the Eastern Church, and
at last passed away in the West.</note> Even in the days of persecution
the only part of their service the Christians consented to omit
was the half-secular agape.<note place='foot'>Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> x. 97.</note> The clergy had power to accord
or withhold access to the ceremonies, and the reverence with
which they were regarded was so great that they were able
to dictate their own conditions of communion.
</p>

<p>
From these circumstances there very naturally arose a
vast system of moral discipline. It was always acknowledged
that men could only rightly approach the sacred table in
certain moral dispositions, and it was very soon added that
the commission of crimes should be expiated by a period of
penance, before access to the communion was granted. A
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
multitude of offences, of very various degrees of magnitude,
such as prolonged abstinence from religious services, prenuptial
unchastity, prostitution, adultery, the adoption of the
profession of gladiator or actor, idolatry, the betrayal of
Christians to persecutors, and paiderastia or unnatural love,
were specified, to each of which a definite spiritual penalty
was annexed. The lowest penalty consisted of deprivation of
the Eucharist for a few weeks. More serious offenders were
deprived of it for a year, or for ten years, or until the hour
of death, while in some cases the sentence amounted to the
greater excommunication, or the deprivation of the Eucharist
for ever. During the period of penance the penitent was
compelled to abstain from the marriage-bed, and from all
other pleasures, and to spend his time chiefly in religious
exercises. Before he was readmitted to communion, he was
accustomed publicly, before the assembled Christians, to
appear clad in sackcloth, with ashes strewn upon his head,
with his hair shaven off, and thus to throw himself at the
feet of the minister, to confess aloud his sins, and to implore
the favour of absolution. The excommunicated man was not
only cut off for ever from the Christian rites; he was severed
also from all intercourse with his former friends. No Christian,
on pain of being himself excommunicated, might eat
with him or speak with him. He must live hated and alone
in this world, and be prepared for damnation in the next.<note place='foot'>The whole subject of the
penitential discipline is treated
minutely in Marshall's <hi rend='italic'>Penitential
Discipline of the Primitive Church</hi>
(first published in 1714, and reprinted
in the library of Anglo-Catholic
Theology), and also in
Bingham, vol. vii. Tertullian gives
a graphic description of the public
penances, <hi rend='italic'>De Pudicit.</hi> v. 13.</note>
</p>

<p>
This system of legislation, resting upon religious terrorism,
forms one of the most important parts of early ecclesiastical
history, and a leading object of the Councils was to develop
or modify it. Although confession was not yet an habitual
and universally obligatory rite, although it was only
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
exacted in cases of notorious sins, it is manifest that we have
in this system, not potentially or in germ, but in full developed
activity, an ecclesiastical despotism of the most
crushing order. But although this recognition of the right
of the clergy to withhold from men what was believed to
be essential to their salvation, laid the foundation of the
worst superstitions of Rome, it had, on the other hand, a very
valuable moral effect. Every system of law is a system of
education, for it fixes in the minds of men certain conceptions
of right and wrong, and of the proportionate enormity of
different crimes; and no legislation was enforced with more
solemnity, or appealed more directly to the religious feelings,
than the penitential discipline of the Church. More than,
perhaps, any other single agency, it confirmed that conviction
of the enormity of sin, and of the retribution that follows it,
which was one of the two great levers by which Christianity
acted upon mankind.
</p>

<p>
But if Christianity was remarkable for its appeals to the
selfish or interested side of our nature, it was far more remarkable
for the empire it attained over disinterested enthusiasm.
The Platonist exhorted men to imitate God; the
Stoic, to follow reason; the Christian, to the love of Christ.
The later Stoics had often united their notions of excellence
in an ideal sage, and Epictetus had even urged his disciples to
set before them some man of surpassing excellence, and to
imagine him continually near them; but the utmost the
Stoic ideal could become was a model for imitation, and the
admiration it inspired could never deepen into affection. It
was reserved for Christianity to present to the world an
ideal character, which through all the changes of eighteen
centuries has inspired the hearts of men with an impassioned
love; has shown itself capable of acting on all ages, nations,
temperaments, and conditions; has been not only the highest
pattern of virtue but the strongest incentive to its practice;
and has exercised so deep an influence that it may be truly
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
said that the simple record of three short years of active life
has done more to regenerate and to soften mankind than all
the disquisitions of philosophers, and all the exhortations of
moralists. This has indeed been the well-spring of whatever
is best and purest in the Christian life. Amid all the sins
and failings, amid all the priestcraft and persecution and
fanaticism that have defaced the Church, it has preserved, in
the character and example of its Founder, an enduring
principle of regeneration. Perfect love knows no rights. It
creates a boundless, uncalculating self-abnegation that transforms
the character, and is the parent of every virtue. Side
by side with the terrorism and the superstitions of dogmatism,
there have ever existed in Christianity those who
would echo the wish of St. Theresa, that she could blot out
both heaven and hell, to serve God for Himself alone; and
the power of the love of Christ has been displayed alike in the
most heroic pages of Christian martyrdom, in the most
pathetic pages of Christian resignation, in the tenderest pages
of Christian charity. It was shown by the martyrs who
sank beneath the fangs of wild beasts, extending to the last
moment their arms in the form of the cross they loved;<note place='foot'>Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> viii, 7.</note>
who ordered their chains to be buried with them as the
insignia of their warfare;<note place='foot'>St. Chrysostom tells this of
St. Babylas. See Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém.
pour servir à l'Hist. eccl.</hi> tome iii.
p. 403.</note> who looked with joy upon their
ghastly wounds, because they had been received for Christ;<note place='foot'>In the preface to a very
ancient Milanese missal it is said
of St. Agatha that as she lay in
the prison cell, torn by the instruments
of torture, St. Peter came
to her in the form of a Christian
physician, and offered to dress her
wounds; but she refused, saying
that she wished for no physician
but Christ. St. Peter, in the name
of that Celestial Physician, commanded
her wounds to close, and
her body became whole as before.
(Tillemont, tome iii. p. 412.)</note>
who welcomed death as the bridegroom welcomes the bride,
because it would bring them near to Him. St. Felicitas was
seized with the pangs of childbirth as she lay in prison
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
awaiting the hour of martyrdom, and as her sufferings extorted
from her a cry, one who stood by said, <q>If you now
suffer so much, what will it be when you are thrown to wild
beasts?</q> <q>What I now suffer,</q> she answered, <q>concerns myself
alone; but then another will suffer for me, for I will
then suffer for Him.</q><note place='foot'>See her acts in Ruinart.</note> When St. Melania had lost both her
husband and her two sons, kneeling by the bed where the
remains of those she loved were laid, the childless widow
exclaimed, <q>Lord, I shall serve Thee more humbly and
readily for being eased of the weight Thou hast taken from
me.</q><note place='foot'>St. Jerome, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxxix.</note>
</p>

<p>
Christian virtue was described by St. Augustine as <q>the
order of love.</q><note place='foot'><q>Definitio brevis et vera virtutis:
ordo est amoris.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De Civ.
Dei</hi>, xv. 22.</note> Those who know how imperfectly the
simple sense of duty can with most men resist the energy of
the passions; who have observed how barren Mohammedanism
has been in all the higher and more tender virtues,
because its noble morality and its pure theism have been
united with no living example; who, above all, have traced
through the history of the Christian Church the influence of
the love of Christ, will be at no loss to estimate the value of
this purest and most distinctive source of Christian enthusiasm.
In one respect we can scarcely realise its effects upon
the early Church. The sense of the fixity of natural laws is
now so deeply implanted in the minds of men, that no truly
educated person, whatever may be his religious opinions,
seriously believes that all the more startling phenomena
around him&mdash;storms, earthquakes, invasions, or famines&mdash;are
results of isolated acts of supernatural power, and are
intended to affect some human interest. But by the early
Christians all these things were directly traced to the Master
they so dearly loved. The result of this conviction was a
state of feeling we can now barely understand. A great poet,
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
in lines which are among the noblest in English literature,
has spoken of one who had died as united to the all-pervading
soul of nature, the grandeur and the tenderness, the
beauty and the passion of his being blending with the kindred
elements of the universe, his voice heard in all its melodies,
his spirit a presence to be felt and known, a part of the one
plastic energy that permeates and animates the globe. Something
of this kind, but of a far more vivid and real character,
was the belief of the early Christian world. The universe,
to them, was transfigured by love. All its phenomena, all
its catastrophes, were read in a new light, were endued with
a new significance, acquired a religious sanctity. Christianity
offered a deeper consolation than any prospect of endless life,
or of millennial glories. It taught the weary, the sorrowing,
and the lonely, to look up to heaven and to say, <q>Thou,
God, carest for me.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising that a religious system which made
it a main object to inculcate moral excellence, and which by
its doctrine of future retribution, by its organisation, and by
its capacity of producing a disinterested enthusiasm, acquired
an unexampled supremacy over the human mind, should
have raised its disciples to a very high condition of sanctity.
There can, indeed, be little doubt that, for nearly two hundred
years after its establishment in Europe, the Christian community
exhibited a moral purity which, if it has been equalled,
has never for any long period been surpassed. Completely
separated from the Roman world that was around them,
abstaining alike from political life, from appeals to the tribunals,
and from military occupations; looking forward
continually to the immediate advent of their Master, and
the destruction of the Empire in which they dwelt, and animated
by all the fervour of a young religion, the Christians
found within themselves a whole order of ideas and feelings
sufficiently powerful to guard them from the contamination
of their age. In their general bearing towards society, and
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
in the nature and minuteness of their scruples, they probably
bore a greater resemblance to the Quakers than to any
other existing sect.<note place='foot'>Besides the obvious points of
resemblance in the common, though
not universal, belief that Christians
should abstain from all weapons
and from all oaths, the whole
teaching of the early Christians
about the duty of simplicity, and
the wickedness of ornaments in
dress (see especially the writings
of Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
and Chrysostom, on this
subject), is exceedingly like that
of the Quakers. The scruple of
Tertullian (<hi rend='italic'>De Coronâ</hi>) about
Christians wearing laurel wreaths
in the festivals, because laurel was
called after Daphne, the lover of
Apollo, was much of the same kind
as that which led the Quakers to
refuse to speak of Tuesday or Wednesday,
lest they should recognise
the gods Tuesco or Woden. On the
other hand, the ecclesiastical aspects
and the sacramental doctrines
of the Church were the extreme
opposites of Quakerism.</note> Some serious signs of moral decadence
might, indeed, be detected even before the Decian persecution;
and it was obvious that the triumph of the Church, by
introducing numerous nominal Christians into its pale, by
exposing it to the temptations of wealth and prosperity, and
by forcing it into connection with secular politics, must have
damped its zeal and impaired its purity; yet few persons, I
think, who had contemplated Christianity as it existed in
the first three centuries would have imagined it possible that
it should completely supersede the Pagan worship around it;
that its teachers should bend the mightiest monarchs to their
will, and stamp their influence on every page of legislation,
and direct the whole course of civilisation for a thousand
years; and yet that the period in which they were so supreme
should have been one of the most contemptible in history.
</p>

<p>
The leading features of that period may be shortly told.
From the death of Marcus Aurelius, about which time Christianity
assumed an important influence in the Roman world,
the decadence of the Empire was rapid and almost uninterrupted.
The first Christian emperor transferred his capital to
a new city, uncontaminated by the traditions and the glories
of Paganism; and he there founded an Empire which derived
all its ethics from Christian sources, and which continued in
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
existence for about eleven hundred years. Of that Byzantine
Empire the universal verdict of history is that it constitutes,
with scarcely an exception, the most thoroughly base and
despicable form that civilisation has yet assumed. Though
very cruel and very sensual, there have been times when
cruelty assumed more ruthless, and sensuality more extravagant,
aspects; but there has been no other enduring civilisation
so absolutely destitute of all the forms and elements of
greatness, and none to which the epithet mean may be so emphatically
applied. The Byzantine Empire was pre-eminently
the age of treachery. Its vices were the vices of men who
had ceased to be brave without learning to be virtuous.
Without patriotism, without the fruition or desire of liberty,
after the first paroxysms of religious agitation, without genius
or intellectual activity; slaves, and willing slaves, in both
their actions and their thoughts, immersed in sensuality and
in the most frivolous pleasures, the people only emerged from
their listlessness when some theological subtilty, or some
rivalry in the chariot races, stimulated them into frantic
riots. They exhibited all the externals of advanced civilisation.
They possessed knowledge; they had continually before
them the noble literature of ancient Greece, instinct with the
loftiest heroism; but that literature, which afterwards did so
much to revivify Europe, could fire the degenerate Greeks
with no spark or semblance of nobility. The history of the
Empire is a monotonous story of the intrigues of priests,
eunuchs, and women, of poisonings, of conspiracies, of uniform
ingratitude, of perpetual fratricides. After the conversion of
Constantine there was no prince in any section of the Roman
Empire altogether so depraved, or at least so shameless, as
Nero or Heliogabalus; but the Byzantine Empire can show
none bearing the faintest resemblance to Antonine or Marcus
Aurelius, while the nearest approximation to that character
at Rome was furnished by the Emperor Julian, who contemptuously
abandoned the Christian faith. At last the
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
Mohammedan invasion terminated the long decrepitude of
the Eastern Empire. Constantinople sank beneath the Crescent,
its inhabitants wrangling about theological differences
to the very moment of their fall.
</p>

<p>
The Asiatic Churches had already perished. The Christian
faith, planted in the dissolute cities of Asia Minor, had produced
many fanatical ascetics and a few illustrious theologians,
but it had no renovating effect upon the people at large. It
introduced among them a principle of interminable and implacable
dissension, but it scarcely tempered in any appreciable
degree their luxury or their sensuality. The frenzy of
pleasure continued unabated, and in a great part of the
Empire it seemed, indeed, only to have attained its climax
after the triumph of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
The condition of the Western Empire was somewhat
different. Not quite a century after the conversion of Constantine,
the Imperial city was captured by Alaric, and a
long series of barbarian invasions at last dissolved the whole
framework of Roman society, while the barbarians themselves,
having adopted the Christian faith and submitted
absolutely to the Christian priests, the Church, which remained
the guardian of all the treasures of antiquity, was
left with a virgin soil to realise her ideal of human excellence.
Nor did she fall short of what might have been expected. She
exercised for many centuries an almost absolute empire over
the thoughts and actions of mankind, and created a civilisation
which was permeated in every part with ecclesiastical
influence. And the dark ages, as the period of Catholic ascendancy
is justly called, do undoubtedly display many features
of great and genuine excellence. In active benevolence, in
the spirit of reverence, in loyalty, in co-operative habits, they
far transcend the noblest ages of Pagan antiquity, while in
that humanity which shrinks from the infliction of suffering,
they were superior to Roman, and in their respect for chastity,
to Greek civilisation. On the other hand, they rank
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
immeasurably below the best Pagan civilisations in civic and
patriotic virtues, in the love of liberty, in the number and
splendour of the great characters they produced, in the dignity
and beauty of the type of character they formed. They
had their full share of tumult, anarchy, injustice, and war,
and they should probably be placed, in all intellectual virtues,
lower than any other period in the history of mankind. A
boundless intolerance of all divergence of opinion was united
with an equally boundless toleration of all falsehood and deliberate
fraud that could favour received opinions. Credulity
being taught as a virtue, and all conclusions dictated by
authority, a deadly torpor sank upon the human mind, which
for many centuries almost suspended its action, and was only
effectually broken by the scrutinising, innovating, and free-thinking
habits that accompanied the rise of the industrial
republics in Italy. Few men who are not either priests or
monks would not have preferred to live in the best days of the
Athenian or of the Roman republics, in the age of Augustus
or in the age of the Antonines, rather than in any period
that elapsed between the triumph of Christianity and the
fourteenth century.
</p>

<p>
It is, indeed, difficult to conceive any clearer proof than
was furnished by the history of the twelve hundred years
after the conversion of Constantine, that while theology has
undoubtedly introduced into the world certain elements and
principles of good, scarcely if at all known to antiquity,
while its value as a tincture or modifying influence in society
can hardly be overrated, it is by no means for the advantage
of mankind that, in the form which the Greek and Catholic
Churches present, it should become a controlling arbiter of
civilisation. It is often said that the Roman world before
Constantine was in a period of rapid decay; that the traditions
and vitality of half-suppressed Paganism account for many
of the aberrations of later times; that the influence of the
Church was often rather nominal and superficial than
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
supreme; and that, in judging the ignorance of the dark ages,
we must make large allowance for the dislocations of society
by the barbarians. In all this there is much truth; but
when we remember that in the Byzantine Empire the renovating
power of theology was tried in a new capital free from
Pagan traditions, and for more than one thousand years unsubdued
by barbarians, and that in the West the Church, for
at least seven hundred years after the shocks of the invasions
had subsided, exercised a control more absolute than any
other moral or intellectual agency has ever attained, it will
appear, I think, that the experiment was very sufficiently
tried. It is easy to make a catalogue of the glaring vices of
antiquity, and to contrast them with the pure morality of
Christian writings; but, if we desire to form a just estimate
of the realised improvement, we must compare the classical
and ecclesiastical civilisations as wholes, and must observe in
each case not only the vices that were repressed, but also the
degree and variety of positive excellence attained. In the
first two centuries of the Christian Church the moral elevation
was extremely high, and was continually appealed to as
a proof of the divinity of the creed. In the century before
the conversion of Constantine, a marked depression was
already manifest. The two centuries after Constantine are
uniformly represented by the Fathers as a period of general
and scandalous vice. The ecclesiastical civilisation that followed,
though not without its distinctive merits, assuredly
supplies no justification of the common boast about the regeneration
of society by the Church. That the civilisation
of the last three centuries has risen in most respects to a
higher level than any that had preceded it, I at least firmly
believe; but theological ethics, though very important, form
but one of the many and complex elements of its excellence.
Mechanical inventions, the habits of industrial life, the discoveries
of physical science, the improvements of government,
the expansion of literature, the traditions of Pagan antiquity,
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
have all a distinguished place, while, the more fully its history
is investigated, the more clearly two capital truths are
disclosed. The first is that the influence of theology having
for centuries numbed and paralysed the whole intellect of
Christian Europe, the revival, which forms the starting-point
of our modern civilisation, was mainly due to the fact that
two spheres of intellect still remained uncontrolled by the
sceptre of Catholicism. The Pagan literature of antiquity,
and the Mohammedan schools of science, were the chief
agencies in resuscitating the dormant energies of Christendom.
The second fact, which I have elsewhere endeavoured to
establish in detail, is that during more than three centuries
the decadence of theological influence has been one of the
most invariable signs and measures of our progress. In
medicine, physical science, commercial interests, politics, and
even ethics, the reformer has been confronted with theological
affirmations which barred his way, which were all defended
as of vital importance, and were all in turn compelled to
yield before the secularising influence of civilisation.
</p>

<p>
We have here, then, a problem of deep interest and importance,
which I propose to investigate in the present chapter.
We have to enquire why it was that a religion which was
not more remarkable for the beauty of its moral teaching
than for the power with which it acted upon mankind, and
which during the last few centuries has been the source of
countless blessings to the world, should have proved itself
for so long a period, and under such a variety of conditions,
altogether unable to regenerate Europe. The question is not
one of languid or imperfect action, but of conflicting agencies.
In the vast and complex organism of Catholicity there were
some parts which acted with admirable force in improving
and elevating mankind. There were others which had a
directly opposite effect.
</p>

<p>
The first aspect in which Christianity presented itself to
the world was as a declaration of the fraternity of men in
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
Christ. Considered as immortal beings, destined for the
extremes of happiness or of misery, and united to one another
by a special community of redemption, the first and most
manifest duty of a Christian man was to look upon his fellow-men
as sacred beings, and from this notion grew up the
eminently Christian idea of the sanctity of all human life.
I have already endeavoured to show&mdash;and the fact is of such
capital importance in meeting the common objections to the
reality of natural moral perceptions, that I venture, at the
risk of tediousness, to recur to it&mdash;that nature does not tell
man that it is wrong to slay without provocation his fellow-men.
Not to dwell upon those early stages of barbarism in
which the higher faculties of human nature are still undeveloped,
and almost in the condition of embryo, it is an historical
fact beyond all dispute, that refined, and even moral
societies have existed, in which the slaughter of men of some
particular class or nation has been regarded with no more
compunction than the slaughter of animals in the chase. The
early Greeks, in their dealings with the barbarians; the
Romans, in their dealings with gladiators, and in some periods
of their history, with slaves; the Spaniards, in their dealings
with Indians; nearly all colonists removed from European
supervision, in their dealings with an inferior race; an immense
proportion of the nations of antiquity, in their dealings
with new-born infants, display this complete and absolute
callousness, and we may discover traces of it even in our
own islands and within the last three hundred years.<note place='foot'>See the masterly description
of the relations of the English to
the Irish in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, in Froude's <hi rend='italic'>History of
England</hi>, ch. xxiv.; and also Lord
Macaulay's description of the feelings
of the Master of Stair towards
the Highlanders. (<hi rend='italic'>History of England</hi>,
ch. xviii.)</note> And
difficult as it may be to realise it in our day, when the atrocity
of all wanton slaughter of men has become an essential part
of our moral feelings, it is nevertheless an incontestable fact
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
that this callousness has been continually shown by good
men, by men who in all other respects would be regarded in
any age as conspicuous for their humanity. In the days of
the Tudors, the best Englishmen delighted in what we should
now deem the most barbarous sports, and it is absolutely
certain that in antiquity men of genuine humanity&mdash;tender
relations, loving friends, charitable neighbours&mdash;men in
whose eyes the murder of a fellow-citizen would have appeared
as atrocious as in our own, attended, instituted, and
applauded gladiatorial games, or counselled without a scruple
the exposition of infants. But it is, as I conceive, a complete
confusion of thought to imagine, as is so commonly done,
that any accumulation of facts of this nature throws the
smallest doubt upon the reality of innate moral perceptions.
All that the intuitive moralist asserts is that we know by
nature that there is a distinction between humanity and
cruelty; that the first belongs to the higher or better part
of our nature, and that it is our duty to cultivate it. The
standard of the age, which is itself determined by the general
condition of society, constitutes the natural line of duty; for
he who falls below it contributes to depress it. Now, there
is no fact more absolutely certain than that nations and
ages which have differed most widely as to the standard have
been perfectly unanimous as to the excellence of humanity.
Plato, who recommended infanticide; Cato, who sold his
aged slaves; Pliny, who applauded the games of the arena;
the old generals, who made their prisoners slaves or gladiators,
as well as the modern generals, who refuse to impose
upon them any degrading labour; the old legislators, who
filled their codes with sentences of torture, mutilation, and
hideous forms of death, as well as the modern legislators,
who are continually seeking to abridge the punishment of
the most guilty; the old disciplinarian, who governed by
force, as well as the modern instructor, who governs by sympathy;
the Spanish girl, whose dark eye glows with rapture
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
as she watches the frantic bull, while the fire streams from
the explosive dart that quivers in its neck; as well as the
reformers we sometimes meet, who are scandalised by all
field sports, or by the sacrifice of animal life for food; or
who will eat only the larger animals, in order to reduce the
sacrifice of life to a minimum; or who are continually inventing
new methods of quickening animal death&mdash;all these
persons, widely as they differ in their acts and in their judgments
of what things should be called <q>brutal,</q> and of what
things should be called <q>fantastic,</q> agree in believing humanity
to be better than cruelty, and in attaching a definite
condemnation to acts that fall below the standard of their
country and their time. Now, it was one of the most important
services of Christianity, that besides quickening greatly
our benevolent affections it definitely and dogmatically asserted
the sinfulness of all destruction of human life as a
matter of amusement, or of simple convenience, and thereby
formed a new standard higher than any which then existed
in the world.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Christianity in this respect began with
the very earliest stage of human life. The practice of abortion
was one to which few persons in antiquity attached any
deep feeling of condemnation. I have noticed in a former
chapter that the physiological theory that the fœtus did not
become a living creature till the hour of birth, had some
influence on the judgments passed upon this practice; and
even where this theory was not generally held, it is easy to
account for the prevalence of the act. The death of an
unborn child does not appeal very powerfully to the feeling
of compassion, and men who had not yet attained any strong
sense of the sanctity of human life, who believed that they
might regulate their conduct on these matters by utilitarian
views, according to the general interest of the community,
might very readily conclude that the prevention of birth was
in many cases an act of mercy. In Greece, Aristotle not
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
only countenanced the practice, but even desired that it
should be enforced by law, when population had exceeded
certain assigned limits.<note place='foot'>See on the views of Aristotle,
Labourt, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches historiques sur
les Enfanstrouvés</hi> (Paris, 1848), p. 9.</note> No law in Greece, or in the Roman
Republic, or during the greater part of the Empire, condemned
it;<note place='foot'>See Gravina, <hi rend='italic'>De Ortu et Progressu
Juris Civilis</hi>, lib. i. 44.</note> and if, as has been thought, some measure was
adopted condemnatory of it before the close of the Pagan
Empire, that measure was altogether inoperative. A long
chain of writers, both Pagan and Christian, represent the
practice as avowed and almost universal. They describe it
as resulting, not simply from licentiousness or from poverty,
but even from so slight a motive as vanity, which made
mothers shrink from the disfigurement of childbirth. They
speak of a mother who had never destroyed her unborn offspring
as deserving of signal praise, and they assure us that
the frequency of the crime was such that it gave rise to a
regular profession. At the same time, while Ovid, Seneca,
Favorinus the Stoic of Arles, Plutarch, and Juvenal, all
speak of abortion as general and notorious, they all speak of
it as unquestionably criminal.<note place='foot'><p><q>Nunc uterum vitiat quæ vult formosa videci,<lb/>
Raraque in hoc ævo est, quæ velit esse parens.</q>
</p>
<p>
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>De Nuce</hi>, 22-23.
</p>
<p>
The same writer has devoted
one of his elegies (ii. 14) to reproaching
his mistress Corinna with
having been guilty of this act. It
was not without danger, and Ovid
says,
</p>
<p>
<q>Sæpe suos utero quæ necit ipsa perit.</q>
</p>
<p>
A niece of Domitian is said to
have died in consequence of having,
at the command of the emperor,
practised it (Sueton. <hi rend='italic'>Domit.</hi> xxii.).
Plutarch notices the custom (<hi rend='italic'>De
Sanitate tuenda</hi>), and Seneca eulogises
Helvia (<hi rend='italic'>Ad Helv.</hi> xvi.) for
being exempt from vanity and having
never destroyed her unborn
offspring. Favorinus, in a remarkable
passage (Aulus Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>Noct.
Att.</hi> xii. 1), speaks of the act as
<q>publica detestatione communique
odio dignum,</q> and proceeds to argue
that it is only a degree less criminal
for mothers to put out their
children to nurse. Juvenal has
some well-known and emphatic lines
on the subject:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>Sed jacet aurato vix ulla puerpera lecto;<lb/>
Tantum artes hujus, tantum medicamina possunt,<lb/>
Quæ steriles facit, atque homines in ventre necandos<lb/>
Conducit.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vi. 592-595.
</p>
<p>
There are also many allusions
to it in the Christian writers. Thus
Minucius Felix (<hi rend='italic'>Octavius</hi>, xxx.):
<q>Vos enim video procreatos filios
nunc feris et avibus exponere,
nunc adstrangulatos misero mortis
genere elidere. Sunt quæ in ipsis
visceribus, medicaminibus epotis,
originem futuri hominis extinguant,
et parricidium faciant antequam
pariant.</q></p></note> It was probably regarded by
the average Romans of the later days of Paganism much as
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
Englishmen in the last century regarded convivial excesses, as
certainly wrong, but so venial as scarcely to deserve censure.
</p>

<p>
The language of the Christians from the very beginning
was widely different. With unwavering consistency and
with the strongest emphasis, they denounced the practice, not
simply as inhuman, but as definitely murder. In the penitential
discipline of the Church, abortion was placed in the
same category as infanticide, and the stern sentence to
which the guilty person was subject imprinted on the minds
of Christians, more deeply than any mere exhortations, a
sense of the enormity of the crime. By the Council of
Ancyra the guilty mother was excluded from the Sacrament
till the very hour of death; and though this penalty was
soon reduced, first to ten and afterwards to seven years'
penitence,<note place='foot'>See Labourt, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur
les Enfans trouvés</hi>, p. 25.</note> the offence still ranked amongst the gravest in the
legislation of the Church. In one very remarkable way the
reforms of Christianity in this sphere were powerfully sustained
by a doctrine which is perhaps the most revolting in
the whole theology of the Fathers. To the Pagans, even
when condemning abortion and infanticide, these crimes
appeared comparatively trivial, because the victims seemed
very insignificant and their sufferings very slight. The
death of an adult man who is struck down in the midst of
his enterprise and his hopes, who is united by ties of love or
friendship to multitudes around him, and whose departure
causes a perturbation and a pang to the society in which he
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
has moved, excites feelings very different from any produced
by the painless extinction of a new-born infant, which,
having scarcely touched the earth, has known none of its
cares and very little of its love. But to the theologian this
infant life possessed a fearful significance. The moment,
they taught, the fœtus in the womb acquired animation, it
became an immortal being, destined, even if it died unborn,
to be raised again on the last day, responsible for the sin of
Adam, and doomed, if it perished without baptism, to be
excluded for ever from heaven and to be cast, as the Greeks
taught, into a painless and joyless limbo, or, as the Latins
taught, into the abyss of hell. It is probably, in a considerable
degree, to this doctrine that we owe in the first instance
the healthy sense of the value and sanctity of infant life
which so broadly distinguishes Christian from Pagan societies,
and which is now so thoroughly incorporated with our
moral feelings as to be independent of all doctrinal changes.
That which appealed so powerfully to the compassion of the
early and mediæval Christians, in the fate of the murdered
infants, was not that they died, but that they commonly
died unbaptised; and the criminality of abortion was immeasurably
aggravated when it was believed to involve, not
only the extinction of a transient life, but also the damnation
of an immortal soul.<note place='foot'>Among the barbarian laws
there is a very curious one about
a daily compensation for children
who had been killed in the womb
on account of the daily suffering
of those children in hell.
<q>Propterea diuturnam judicaverunt
antecessores nostri compositionem
et judices postquam religio Christianitatis
inolevit in mundo. Quia
diuturnam postquam incarnationem
suscepit anima, quamvis ad nativitatis
lucem minima pervenisset,
patitur pœnam, quia sine sacramento
regenerationis abortivo modo
tradita est ad inferos.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Leges Bajuvariorum</hi>,
tit. vii. cap. xx. in
Canciani, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Barbar.</hi> vol. ii. p.
374. The first foundling hospital
of which we have undoubted record
is that founded at Milan, by a man
named Datheus, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 789. Muratori
has preserved (<hi rend='italic'>Antich. Ital.</hi>
Diss. xxxvii.) the charter embodying the motives of the founder, in
which the following sentences occur:
<q>Quia frequenter per luxuriam
hominum genus decipitur, et
exinde malum homicidii generatur,
dum concipientes ex adulterio, ne
prodantur in publico, fetos teneros
necant, <emph>et absque baptismatis lavacro
parvulos ad Tartara mittunt</emph>, quia
nullum reperiunt locum, quo servare
vivos valeant,</q> &amp;c. Henry
II. of France, 1556, made a long
law against women who, <q>advenant
le temps de leur part et délivrance
de leur enfant, occultement s'en
délivrent, puis le suffoquent et autrement
suppriment <emph>sans leur avoir
fait empartir le Saint Sacrement
du Baptême</emph>.</q>&mdash;Labourt, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
sur les Enfans trouvés</hi>, p. 47. There
is a story told of a Queen of Portugal
(sister to Henry V. of England,
and mother of St. Ferdinand) that,
being in childbirth, her life was
despaired of unless she took a
medicine which would accelerate
the birth but probably sacrifice the
life of the child. She answered
that <q>she would not purchase her
temporal life by sacrificing the
eternal salvation of her son.</q>&mdash;Bollandists,
<hi rend='italic'>Act. Sanctor.</hi>, June 5th.</note> In the <q>Lives of the Saints</q> there is
a curious legend of a man who, being desirous of ascertaining
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
the condition of a child before birth, slew a pregnant woman,
committing thereby a double murder, that of the mother and
of the child in her womb. Stung by remorse, the murderer
fled to the desert, and passed the remainder of his life in
constant penance and prayer. At last, after many years, the
voice of God told him that he had been forgiven the murder
of the woman. But yet his end was a clouded one. He
never could obtain an assurance that he had been forgiven
the death of the child.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mémoires pour servir
à l'Histoire ecclésiastique</hi> (Paris,
1701), tome x. p. 41. St. Clem.
Alexand. says that infants in the
womb and exposed infants have
guardian angels to watch over them.
(<hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> v.)</note>
</p>

<p>
If we pass to the next stage of human life, that of the
new-born infant, we find ourselves in presence of that practice
of infanticide which was one of the deepest stains of the
ancient civilisation. The natural history of this crime is
somewhat peculiar.<note place='foot'>There is an extremely large
literature devoted to the subject
of infanticide, exposition, foundlings,
&amp;c. The books I have chiefly
followed are Terme et Monfalcon,
<hi rend='italic'>Histoire des Enfans trouvés</hi> (Paris,
1840); Remacle, <hi rend='italic'>Des Hospices
d'Enfans trouvés</hi> (1838); Labourt,
<hi rend='italic'>Recherches historiques sur les Enfans
trouvés</hi> (Paris, 1848); Kœnigswarter,
<hi rend='italic'>Essai sur la Législation des
Peuples anciens et modernes relative
aux Enfans nés hors Mariage</hi> (Paris,
1842). There are also many details
on the subject in Godefroy's
Commentary to the laws about
children in the Theodosian Code,
in Malthus, <hi rend='italic'>On Population</hi>, in
Edward's tract <hi rend='italic'>On the State of
Slavery in the Early and Middle
Ages of Christianity</hi>, and in most
ecclesiastical histories.</note> Among savages, whose feelings of
compassion are very faint, and whose warlike and nomadic
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
habits are eminently unfavourable to infant life, it is, as
might be expected, the usual custom for the parent to decide
whether he desires to preserve the child he has called into
existence, and if he does not, to expose or slay it. In nations
that have passed out of the stage of barbarism, but are still
rude and simple in their habits, the practice of infanticide is
usually rare; but, unlike other crimes of violence, it is not
naturally diminished by the progress of civilisation, for, after
the period of savage life is passed, its prevalence is influenced
much more by the sensuality than by the barbarity of a
people.<note place='foot'>It must not; however, be inferred
from this that infanticide
increases in direct proportion to
the unchastity of a nation. Probably
the condition of civilised
society in which it is most common,
is where a large amount of
actual unchastity coexists with
very strong social condemnation of
the sinner, and where, in consequence,
there is an intense anxiety
to conceal the fall. A recent writer
on Spain has noticed the almost
complete absence of infanticide in
that country, and has ascribed it
to the great leniency of public
opinion towards female frailty.
Foundling hospitals, also, greatly
influence the history of infanticide;
but the mortality in them was long
so great that it may be questioned
whether they have diminished the
number of the deaths, though they
have, as I believe, greatly diminished
the number of the murders
of children. Lord Kames, writing
in the last half of the eighteenth
century, says: <q>In Wales, even at
present, and in the Highlands of
Scotland, it is scarce a disgrace
for a young woman to have a bastard.
In the country last mentioned,
the first instance known of
a bastard child being destroyed by
its mother through shame is a late
one. The virtue of chastity appears
to be thus gaining ground, as
the only temptation a woman can
have to destroy her child is to conceal
her frailty.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sketches of the
History of Man&mdash;On the Progress
of the Female Sex.</hi> The last clause
is clearly inaccurate, but there
seems reason for believing that
maternal affection is generally
stronger than want, but weaker
than shame.</note> We may trace too, in many countries and ages, the
notion that children, as the fruit, representatives, and dearest
possessions of their parents, are acceptable sacrifices to the
gods.<note place='foot'>See Warburton's <hi rend='italic'>Divine Legation</hi>,
vii. 2.</note> Infanticide, as is well known, was almost universally
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
admitted among the Greeks, being sanctioned, and in some
cases enjoined, upon what we should now call <q>the greatest
happiness principle,</q> by the ideal legislations of Plato and
Aristotle, and by the actual legislations of Lycurgus and
Solon. Regarding the community as a whole, they clearly
saw that it is in the highest degree for the interest of society
that the increase of population should be very jealously restricted,
and that the State should be as far as possible free
from helpless and unproductive members; and they therefore
concluded that the painless destruction of infant life, and
especially of those infants who were so deformed or diseased
that their lives, if prolonged, would probably have been a
burden to themselves, was on the whole a benefit. The very
sensual tone of Greek life rendered the modern notion of
prolonged continence wholly alien to their thoughts; and the
extremely low social and intellectual condition of Greek
mothers, who exercised no appreciable influence over the
habits of thought of the nation should also, I think, be taken
into account, for it has always been observed that mothers
are much more distinguished than fathers for their affection
for infants that have not yet manifested the first dawning of
reason. Even in Greece, however, infanticide and exposition
were not universally permitted. In Thebes these offences
are said to have been punished by death.<note place='foot'>Ælian, <hi rend='italic'>Varia Hist.</hi> ii. 7. Passages
from the Greek imaginative
writers, representing exposition as
the avowed and habitual practice
of poor parents, are collected by
Terme et Monfalcon, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Enfans
trouvés</hi>, pp. 39-45. Tacitus
notices with praise (<hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, xix.)
that the Germans did not allow infanticide.
He also notices (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi>
v. 5) the prohibition of infanticide
among the Jews, and ascribes it to
their desire to increase the population.</note>
</p>

<p>
The power of life and death, which in Rome was originally
conceded to the father over his children, would appear
to involve an unlimited permission of infanticide; but a very
old law, popularly ascribed to Romulus, in this respect restricted
the parental rights, enjoining the father to bring up
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
all his male children, and at least his eldest female child,
forbidding him to destroy any well-formed child till it had
completed its third year, when the affections of the parent
might be supposed to be developed, but permitting the exposition
of deformed or maimed children with the consent of
their five nearest relations.<note place='foot'>Dion. Halic. ii.</note> The Roman policy was always
to encourage, while the Greek policy was rather to restrain,
population, and infanticide never appears to have been common
in Rome till the corrupt and sensual days of the Empire.
The legislators then absolutely condemned it, and it was
indirectly discouraged by laws which accorded special privileges
to the fathers of many children, exempted poor parents
from most of the burden of taxation, and in some degree
provided for the security of exposed infants. Public opinion
probably differed little from that of our own day as to the
fact, though it differed from it much as to the degree, of its
criminality. It was, as will be remembered, one of the
charges most frequently brought against the Christians, and
it was one that never failed to arouse popular indignation.
Pagan and Christian authorities are, however, united in
speaking of infanticide as a crying vice of the Empire, and
Tertullian observed that no laws were more easily or more
constantly evaded than those which condemned it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ad Nat.</hi> i. 15.</note> A broad
distinction was popularly drawn between infanticide and
exposition. The latter, though probably condemned, was
certainly not punished by law;<note place='foot'>The well-known jurisconsult
Paulus had laid down the proposition,
<q>Necare videtur non tantum
is qui partum perfocat sed et is qui
abjicit et qui alimonia denegat et
qui publicis locis misericordiæ
causa exponit quam ipse non habet.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Dig.</hi> lib. xxv. tit. iii. 1. 4.) These
words have given rise to a famous
controversy between two Dutch
professors, named Noodt and Bynkershoek,
conducted on both sides
with great learning, and on the
side of Noodt with great passion.
Noodt maintained that these words
are simply the expression of a
moral truth, not a judicial decision,
and that exposition was never
illegal in Rome till some time after
the establishment of Christianity.
His opponent argued that exposition
was legally identical with infanticide,
and became, therefore,
illegal when the power of life and
death was withdrawn from the
father. (See the works of Noodt
(Cologne, 1763) and of Bynkershoek
(Cologne, 1761)). It was at
least certain that exposition was
notorious and avowed, and the law
against it, if it existed, inoperative.
Gibbon (<hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>,
ch. xliv.) thinks the law censured
but did not punish exposition.
See, too, Troplong, <hi rend='italic'>Influence du
Christianisme sur le Droit</hi>, p. 271.</note> it was practised on a
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
gigantic scale and with absolute impunity, noticed by writers
with the most frigid indifference, and, at least in the case of
destitute parents, considered a very venial offence.<note place='foot'>Quintilian speaks in a tone of
apology, if not justification, of the
exposition of the children of destitute
parents (<hi rend='italic'>Decl.</hi> cccvi.), and even
Plutarch speaks of it without censure.
(<hi rend='italic'>De Amor. Prolis.</hi>) There
are several curious illustrations in
Latin literature of the different
feelings of fathers and mothers on
this matter. Terence (<hi rend='italic'>Heauton.</hi>
Act. iii. Scene 5) represents Chremes
as having, as a matter of course,
charged his pregnant wife to have
her child killed provided it was a
girl. The mother, overcome by
pity, shrank from doing so, and
secretly gave it to an old woman
to expose it, in hopes that it might
be preserved. Chremes, on hearing
what had been done, reproached
his wife for her womanly pity, and
told her she had been not only
disobedient but irrational, for she
was only consigning her daughter
to the life of a prostitute. In
Apuleius (<hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> lib. x.) we have a
similar picture of a father starting
for a journey, leaving his wife in
childbirth, and giving her his parting
command to kill her child if it
should be a girl, which she could
not bring herself to do. The girl
was brought up secretly. In the
case of weak or deformed infants
infanticide seems to have been
habitual. <q>Portentosos fœtus extinguimus,
liberos quoque, si debiles
monstrosique editi sunt, mergimus.
Non ira, sed ratio est, a sanis inutilia
secernere.</q>&mdash;Seneca, <hi rend='italic'>De Ira</hi>, i.
15. Terence has introduced a
picture of the exposition of an infant
into his <hi rend='italic'>Andria</hi>, Act. iv. Scene
5. See, too, Suet. <hi rend='italic'>August.</hi> lxv.
According to Suetonius (<hi rend='italic'>Calig.</hi> v.),
on the death of Germanicus, women
exposed their new-born children in
sign of grief. Ovid had dwelt with
much feeling on the barbarity of
these practices. It is a very
curious fact, which has been noticed
by Warburton, that Chremes,
whose sentiments about infants we
have just seen, is the very personage
into whose mouth Terence has put
the famous sentiment, <q>Homo sum,
humani nihil a me alienum puto.</q></note> Often,
no doubt, the exposed children perished, but more frequently
the very extent of the practice saved the lives of the victims.
They were brought systematically to a column near the Velabrum,
and there taken by speculators, who educated them as
slaves, or very frequently as prostitutes.<note place='foot'>That these were the usual
fates of exposed infants is noticed
by several writers. Some, too,
both Pagan and Christian (Quintilian,
<hi rend='italic'>Decl.</hi> cccvi.; Lactantius, Div.
Inst. vi. 20, &amp;c.), speak of the liability
to incestuous marriages resulting
from frequent exposition.
In the Greek poets there are
several allusions to rich childless
men adopting foundlings, and Juvenal
says it was common for
Roman wives to palm off foundlings
on their husbands for their
sons. (<hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vi. 603.) There is an
extremely horrible declamation in
Seneca the Rhetorician (<hi rend='italic'>Controvers.</hi>
lib. v. 33) about exposed children
who were said to have been maimed
and mutilated, either to prevent
their recognition by their parents,
or that they might gain money as
beggars for their masters.</note>
</p>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
On the whole, what was demanded on this subject was
not any clearer moral teaching, but rather a stronger enforcement
of the condemnation long since passed upon infanticide,
and an increased protection for exposed infants. By the
penitential sentences, by the dogmatic considerations I have
enumerated, and by the earnest exhortations both of her
preachers and writers, the Church laboured to deepen the
sense of the enormity of the act, and especially to convince
men that the guilt of abandoning their children to the precarious
and doubtful mercy of the stranger was scarcely
less than that of simple infanticide.<note place='foot'>See passages on this point
cited by Godefroy in his <hi rend='italic'>Commentary
to the Law <q>De Expositis,</q> Codex
Theod.</hi> lib. v. tit. 7.</note> In the civil law her
influence was also displayed, though not, I think, very
advantageously. By the counsel, it is said, of Lactantius,
Constantine, in the very year of his conversion, in order to
diminish infanticide by destitute parents, issued a decree,
applicable in the first instance to Italy, but extended in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
322 to Africa, in which he commanded that those children
whom their parents were unable to support should be clothed
and fed at the expense of the State,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Codex Theod.</hi> lib. xi. tit.
27.</note> a policy which had already
been pursued on a large scale under the Antonines. In <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
331, a law intended to multiply the chances of the exposed
child being taken charge of by some charitable or interested
person, provided that the foundling should remain the absolute
property of its saviour, whether he adopted it as a son
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
or employed it as a slave, and that the parent should not
have power at any future time to reclaim it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Codex Theod.</hi> lib. v. tit. 7,
lex. 1.</note> By another
law, which had been issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 329, it had been provided
that children who had been, not exposed, but sold,
might be reclaimed upon payment by the father.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> lib. v. tit. 8, lex 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
The last two laws cannot be regarded with unmingled
satisfaction. The law regulating the condition of exposed children,
though undoubtedly enacted with the most benevolent
intentions, was in some degree a retrograde step, the Pagan
laws having provided that the father might always withdraw
the child he had exposed, from servitude, by payment of the
expenses incurred in supporting it,<note place='foot'>See Godefroy's <hi rend='italic'>Commentary
to the Law</hi>.</note> while Trajan had even
decided that the exposed child could not become under any
circumstance a slave.<note place='foot'>In a letter to the younger Pliny.
(<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> x. 72.)</note> The law of Constantine, on the other
hand, doomed it to an irrevocable servitude; and this law
continued in force till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 529, when Justinian, reverting to
the principle of Trajan, decreed that not only the father lost
all legitimate authority over his child by exposing it, but
also that the person who had saved it could not by that act
deprive it of its natural liberty. But this law applied only
to the Eastern Empire; and in part at least of the West<note place='foot'>See on this point Muratori,
<hi rend='italic'>Antich. Ital.</hi> Diss. xxxvii.</note>
the servitude of exposed infants continued for centuries, and
appears only to have terminated with the general extinction
of slavery in Europe. The law of Constantine concerning
the sale of children was also a step, though perhaps a necessary
step, of retrogression. A series of emperors, among
whom Caracalla was conspicuous, had denounced and endeavoured
to abolish, as <q>shameful,</q> the traffic in free children,
and Diocletian had expressly and absolutely condemned it.<note place='foot'>See on these laws, Wallon,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de l'Esclavage</hi>, tome iii. pp.
52, 53.</note>
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
The extreme misery, however, resulting from the civil wars
under Constantine, had rendered it necessary to authorise
the old practice of selling children in the case of absolute
destitution, which, though it had been condemned, had probably
never altogether ceased. Theodosius the Great attempted
to take a step in advance, by decreeing that the
children thus sold might regain their freedom without the
repayment of the purchase-money, a temporary service being
a sufficient compensation for the purchase;<note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. iii. tit. 3,
lex 1, and the Commentary.</note> but this measure
was repealed by Valentinian III. The sale of children in
case of great necessity, though denounced by the Fathers,<note place='foot'>On the very persistent denunciation
of this practice by the
Fathers, see many examples in
Terme et Monfalcon.</note>
continued long after the time of Theodosius, nor does any
Christian emperor appear to have enforced the humane
enactment of Diocletian.
</p>

<p>
Together with these measures for the protection of exposed
children, there were laws directly condemnatory of
infanticide. This branch of the subject is obscured by much
ambiguity and controversy; but it appears most probable
that the Pagan legislation reckoned infanticide as a form of
homicide, though, being deemed less atrocious than other
forms of homicide, it was punished, not by death, but by
banishment.<note place='foot'>This is a mere question of
definition, upon which lawyers have
expended much learning and discussion.
Cujas thought the Romans
considered infanticide a
crime, but a crime generically different
from homicide. Godefroy
maintains that it was classified as
homicide, but that, being esteemed
less heinous than the other forms
of homicide, it was only punished
by exile. See the Commentary to
<hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 14, l. 1.</note> A law of Constantine, intended principally,
and perhaps exclusively, for Africa, where the sacrifices of
children to Saturn were very common, assimilated to parricide
the murder of a child by its father;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 15.</note> and finally, Valentinian,
in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 374, made all infanticide a capital offence,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 14, lex 1.</note> and
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
especially enjoined the punishment of exposition.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Corp. Juris</hi>, lib. viii. tit. 52,
lex 2.</note> A law of
the Spanish Visigoths, in the seventh century, punished infanticide
and abortion with death or blindness.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Leges Wisigothorum</hi> (lib. vi.
tit. 3, lex 7) and other laws (lib.
iv. tit. 4) condemned exposition.</note> In the
Capitularies of Charlemagne the former crime was punished
as homicide.<note place='foot'><q>Si quis infantem necaverit
ut homicida teneatur.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Capit.</hi> vii.
168.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is not possible to ascertain, with any degree of accuracy,
what diminution of infanticide resulted from these measures.
It may, however, be safely asserted that the publicity of the
trade in exposed children became impossible under the influence
of Christianity, and that the sense of the serious nature
of the crime was very considerably increased. The extreme
destitution, which was one of its most fertile causes, was met
by Christian charity. Many exposed children appear to
have been educated by individual Christians.<note place='foot'>It appears, from a passage of
St. Augustine, that Christian virgins
were accustomed to collect
exposed children and to have them
brought into the church. See
Terme et Monfalcon, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des
Enfans trouvés</hi>, p. 74.</note> Brephotrophia
and Orphanotrophia are among the earliest recorded charitable
institutions of the Church; but it is not certain that
exposed children were admitted into them, and we find no
trace for several centuries of Christian foundling hospitals.
This form of charity grew up gradually in the early part of
the middle ages. It is said that one existed at Trêves in the
sixth, and at Angers in the seventh century, and it is certain
that one existed at Milan in the eighth century.<note place='foot'>Compare Labourt, <hi rend='italic'>Rech. sur
les Enfans trouvés</hi>, pp. 32, 33;
Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antichità Italiane</hi>, Dissert.
xxxvii. Muratori has also
briefly noticed the history of these
charities in his <hi rend='italic'>Carità Christiana</hi>,
cap. xxvii.</note> The
Council of Rouen, in the ninth century, invited women who
had secretly borne children to place them at the door of the
church, and undertook to provide for them if they were not
reclaimed. It is probable that they were brought up among
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
the numerous slaves or serfs attached to the ecclesiastical
properties; for a decree of the Council of Arles, in the fifth
century, and afterwards a law of Charlemagne, had echoed
the enactment of Constantine, declaring that exposed children
should be the slaves of their protectors. As slavery declined,
the memorials of many sins, like many other of the discordant
elements of mediæval society, were doubtless absorbed and
consecrated in the monastic societies. The strong sense
always evinced in the Church of the enormity of unchastity
probably rendered the ecclesiastics more cautious in this than
in other forms of charity, for institutions especially intended
for deserted children advanced but slowly. Even Rome, the
mother of many charities, could boast of none till the beginning
of the thirteenth century.<note place='foot'>The first seems to have been
the hospital of Sta. Maria in
Sassia, which had existed with
various changes from the eighth
century, but was made a foundling
hospital and confided to the
care of Guy of Montpellier in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1204. According to one tradition,
Pope Innocent III. had
been shocked at hearing of infants
drawn in the nets of fishermen
from the Tiber. According to
another, he was inspired by an
angel. Compare Remacle, <hi rend='italic'>Hospices
d'Enfans trouvés</hi>, pp. 36-37, and
Amydemus, <hi rend='italic'>Pietas Romana</hi> (a book
written <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1624, and translated
in part into English in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1687),
Eng. trans, pp. 2, 3.</note> About the middle of the
twelfth century we find societies at Milan charged, among
other functions, with seeking for exposed children. Towards
the close of the same century, a monk of Montpellier, whose
very name is doubtful, but who is commonly spoken of as
Brother Guy, founded a confraternity called by the name of
the Holy Ghost, and devoted to the protection and education
of children; and this society in the two following centuries
ramified over a great part of Europe.<note place='foot'>For the little that is known
about this missionary of charity,
compare Remacle, <hi rend='italic'>Hospices d'Enfans
trouvés</hi>, pp. 34-44; and Labourt,
<hi rend='italic'>Recherches historiques sur les
Enfans trouvés</hi>, pp. 38-41.</note> Though principally
and at first, perhaps, exclusively intended for the care of the
orphans of legitimate marriages, though in the fifteenth
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
century the Hospital of the Holy Ghost at Paris even refused
to admit deserted children, yet the care of foundlings
soon passed in a great measure into its hands. At last, after
many complaints of the frequency of infanticide, St. Vincent
de Paul arose, and gave so great an impulse to that branch
of charity that he may be regarded as its second author, and
his influence was felt not only in private charities, but in
legislative enactments. Into the effects of these measures&mdash;the
encouragement of the vice of incontinence by institutions
that were designed to suppress the crime of infanticide, and
the serious moral controversies suggested by this apparent
conflict between the interests of humanity and of chastity&mdash;it
is not necessary for me to enter. We are at present concerned
with the principles that actuated Christian charity,
not with the wisdom of its organisations. Whatever mistakes
may have been made, the entire movement I have
traced displays an anxiety not only for the life, but also for
the moral well-being, of the castaways of society, such as the
most humane nations of antiquity had never reached. This
minute and scrupulous care for human life and human virtue
in the humblest forms, in the slave, the gladiator, the savage,
or the infant, was indeed wholly foreign to the genius of
Paganism. It was produced by the Christian doctrine of
the inestimable value of each immortal soul. It is the distinguishing
and transcendent characteristic of every society
into which the spirit of Christianity has passed.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Christianity in the protection of infant
life, though very real, may be, and I think often has been,
exaggerated. It would be difficult to overrate its influence
in the sphere we have next to examine. There is scarcely
any other single reform so important in the moral history of
mankind as the suppression of the gladiatorial shows, and
this feat must be almost exclusively ascribed to the Christian
Church. When we remember how extremely few of the
best and greatest men of the Roman world had absolutely
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
condemned the games of the amphitheatre, it is impossible to
regard, without the deepest admiration, the unwavering and
uncompromising consistency of the patristic denunciations.
And even comparing the Fathers with the most enlightened
Pagan moralists in their treatment of this matter, we shall
usually find one most significant difference. The Pagan, in
the spirit of philosophy, denounced these games as inhuman,
or demoralising, or degrading, or brutal. The Christian, in
the spirit of the Church, represented them as a definite sin,
the sin of murder, for which the spectators as well as the
actors were directly responsible before Heaven. In the very
latest days of the Pagan Empire, magnificent amphitheatres
were still arising,<note place='foot'>E.g. the amphitheatre of
Verona was only built under Diocletian.</note> and Constantine himself had condemned
numerous barbarian captives to combat with wild beasts.<note place='foot'><q>Quid hoc triumpho pulchrius?...
Tantam captivorum
multitudinem bestiis objicit ut ingrati
et perfidi non minus doloris
ex ludibrio sui quam ex ipsa morte
patiantur.</q>&mdash;Incerti, <hi rend='italic'>Panegyricus
Constant</hi>. <q>Puberes qui in manus
venerunt, quorum nec perfidia erat
apta militiæ nec ferocia servituti
ad pœnas spectaculo dati sævientes
bestias multitudine sua fatigarunt.</q>&mdash;Eumenius,
<hi rend='italic'>Paneg. Constant.</hi> xi.</note>
It was in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 325, immediately after the convocation of the
Council of Nice, that the first Christian emperor issued the
first edict in the Roman Empire condemnatory of the gladiatorial
games.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. xv. tit. 12,
lex 1. Sozomen, i. 8.</note> It was issued in Berytus in Syria, and is
believed by some to have been only applicable to the province
of Phœnicia;<note place='foot'>This, at least, is the opinion
of Godefroy, who has discussed the
subject very fully. (<hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi>
lib. xv. tit. 12.)</note> but even in this province it was suffered to
be inoperative, for, only four years later, Libanius speaks of
the shows as habitually celebrated at Antioch.<note place='foot'>Libanius, <hi rend='italic'>De Vita Sua</hi>, 3.</note> In the
Western Empire their continuance was fully recognised,
though a few infinitesimal restrictions were imposed upon
them. Constantine, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 357, prohibited the lanistæ, or
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
purveyors of gladiators, from bribing servants of the palace to
enrol themselves as combatants.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. xv. tit. 12, l. 2.</note> Valentinian, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 365, forbade
any Christian criminal,<note place='foot'>Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 40, l. 8.</note> and in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 367, any one connected
with the Palatine,<note place='foot'>Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 40, l. 11.</note> being condemned to fight. Honorius
prohibited any slave who had been a gladiator passing into
the service of a senator; but the real object of this last
measure was, I imagine, not so much to stigmatise the
gladiator, as to guard against the danger of an armed nobility.<note place='foot'>Ibid. lib. xv. tit. 12, l. 3.</note>
A much more important fact is that the spectacles were
never introduced into the new capital of Constantine. At
Rome, though they became less numerous, they do not appear
to have been suspended until their final suppression. The
passion for gladiators was the worst, while religious liberty
was probably the best, feature of the old Pagan society; and
it is a melancholy fact that of these two it was the nobler
part that in the Christian Empire was first destroyed. Theodosius
the Great, who suppressed all diversity of worship
throughout the Empire, and who showed himself on many
occasions the docile slave of the clergy, won the applause of
the Pagan Symmachus by compelling his barbarian prisoners
to fight as gladiators.<note place='foot'>Symmach. <hi rend='italic'>Ex.</hi> x. 61.</note> Besides this occasion, we have special
knowledge of gladiatorial games that were celebrated in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
385, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 391, and afterwards in the reign of Honorius,
and the practice of condemning criminals to the arena still
continued.<note place='foot'>M. Wallon has traced these
last shows with much learning.
(<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de l'Esclavage</hi>, tome iii. pp.
421-429.)</note>
</p>

<p>
But although the suppression of the gladiatorial shows
was not effected in the metropolis of the Empire till nearly
ninety years after Christianity had been the State religion,
the distinction between the teaching of the Christians and
Pagans on the subject remained unimpaired. To the last,
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
the most estimable of the Pagans appear to have regarded
them with favour or indifference. Julian, it is true, with a
rare magnanimity, refused persistently, in his conflict with
Christianity, to avail himself, as he might most easily have
done, of the popular passion for games which the Church
condemned; but Libanius has noticed them with some approbation,<note place='foot'>He wavered, however, on
the subject, and on one occasion
condemned them. See Wallon,
tome iii. p. 423.</note>
and Symmachus, as we have already seen, both instituted
and applauded them. But the Christians steadily
refused to admit any professional gladiator to baptism till he
had pledged himself to abandon his calling, and every Christian
who attended the games was excluded from communion.
The preachers and writers of the Church denounced them
with the most unqualified vehemence, and the poet Prudentius
made a direct and earnest appeal to the emperor to suppress
them. In the East, where they had never taken very firm
root, they appear to have ceased about the time of Theodosius,
and a passion for chariot races, which rose to the most extravagant
height at Constantinople and in many other cities,
took their place. In the West, the last gladiatorial show was
celebrated at Rome, under Honorius, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 404, in honour
of the triumph of Stilicho, when an Asiatic monk, named
Telemachus, animated by the noblest heroism of philanthropy,
rushed into the amphitheatre, and attempted to part the combatants.
He perished beneath a shower of stones flung by
the angry spectators; but his death led to the final abolition
of the games.<note place='foot'>Theodoret, v. 26.</note> Combats of men with wild beasts continued,
however, much later, and were especially popular in the East.
The difficulty of procuring wild animals, amid the general
poverty, contributed, with other causes, to their decline.
They sank, at last, into games of cruelty to animals, but of
little danger to men, and were finally condemned, at the end
of the seventh century, by the Council of Trullo.<note place='foot'>Muller, <hi rend='italic'>De Genio Ævi Theodosiani</hi>
(1797), vol. ii. p. 88; Milman,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Early Christianity</hi>,
vol. iii. pp. 343-347.</note> In Italy,
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
the custom of sham fights, which continued through the whole
of the middle ages, and which Petrarch declares were in his
days sometimes attended with considerable bloodshed, may
perhaps be traced in some degree to the traditions of the
amphitheatre.<note place='foot'>See on these fights Ozanam's
<hi rend='italic'>Civilisation in the Fifth Century</hi>
(Eng. trans.), vol. i. p. 130.</note>
</p>

<p>
The extinction of the gladiatorial spectacles is, of all the
results of early Christian influence, that upon which the
historian can look with the deepest and most unmingled
satisfaction. Horrible as was the bloodshed they directly
caused, these games were perhaps still more pernicious on
account of the callousness of feeling they diffused through all
classes, the fatal obstacle they presented to any general elevation
of the standard of humanity. Yet the attitude of the
Pagans decisively proves that no progress of philosophy or
social civilisation was likely, for a very long period, to have
extirpated them; and it can hardly be doubted that, had they
been flourishing unchallenged as in the days of Trajan, when
the rude warriors of the North obtained the empire of Italy,
they would have been eagerly adopted by the conquerors,
would have taken deep root in mediæval life, and have indefinitely
retarded the progress of humanity. Christianity
alone was powerful enough to tear this evil plant from the
Roman soil. The Christian custom of legacies for the relief
of the indigent and suffering replaced the Pagan custom of
bequeathing sums of money for games in honour of the dead;
and the month of December, which was looked forward to
with eagerness through all the Roman world, as the special
season of the gladiatorial spectacles, was consecrated in the
Church by another festival commemorative of the advent of
Christ.
</p>

<p>
The notion of the sanctity of human life, which led the
early Christians to combat and at last to overthrow the
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
gladiatorial games, was carried by some of them to an extent
altogether irreconcilable with national independence, and
with the prevailing penal system. Many of them taught
that no Christian might lawfully take away life, either as a
soldier, or by bringing a capital charge, or by acting as an
executioner. The first of these questions it will be convenient
to reserve for a later period of this chapter, when I propose
to examine the relations of Christianity to the military spirit,
and a very few words will be sufficient to dispose of the
others. The notion that there is something impure and defiling,
even in a just execution, is one which may be traced
through many ages; and executioners, as the ministers of the
law, have been from very ancient times regarded as unholy.
In both Greece and Rome the law compelled them to live
outside the walls, and at Rhodes they were never permitted
even to enter the city.<note place='foot'>Nieupoort, <hi rend='italic'>De Ritibus Romanorum</hi>,
p. 169.</note> Notions of this kind were very
strongly held in the early Church; and a decree of the penitential
discipline which was enforced, even against emperors
and generals, forbade any one whose hands had been imbrued
in blood, even when that blood was shed in a righteous war,
approaching the altar without a preparatory period of penance.
The opinions of the Christians of the first three centuries
were usually formed without any regard to the necessities of
civil or political life; but when the Church obtained an
ascendancy, it was found necessary speedily to modify them;
and although Lactantius, in the fourth century, maintained
the unlawfulness of all bloodshed,<note place='foot'>See a very unequivocal passage,
<hi rend='italic'>Inst. Div.</hi> vi. 20. Several
earlier testimonies on the subject
are given by Barbeyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Morale des
Pères</hi>, and in many other books.</note> as strongly as Origen in
the third, and Tertullian in the second, the common doctrine
was simply that no priest or bishop must take any part in a
capital charge. From this exceptional position of the clergy
they speedily acquired the position of official intercessors for
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
criminals, ambassadors of mercy, when, from some act of
sedition or other cause, their city or neighbourhood was
menaced with a bloody invasion. The right of sanctuary,
which was before possessed by the Imperial statues and by
the Pagan temples, was accorded to the churches. During
the holy seasons of Lent and Easter, no criminal trials could
be held, and no criminal could be tortured or executed.<note place='foot'>See two laws enacted in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
380 (<hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> ix. tit. 35, l. 4)
and <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 389 (<hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> ix. tit.
35, l. 5). Theodosius the Younger
made a law (ix. tit. 35, l. 7) excepting
the Isaurian robbers from the
privileges of these laws.</note>
Miracles, it was said, were sometimes wrought to attest the
innocence of accused or condemned men, but were never
wrought to consign criminals to execution by the civil
power.<note place='foot'>There are, of course, innumerable
miracles punishing guilty
men, but I know none assisting the
civil power in doing so. As an
example of the miracles in defence
of the innocent, I may cite one by
St. Macarius. An innocent man,
accused of a murder, fled to him.
He brought both the accused and
accusers to the tomb of the murdered
man, and asked him whether
the prisoner was the murderer. The
corpse answered in the negative;
the bystanders implored St. Macarius
to ask it to reveal the real
culprit; but St. Macarius refused
to do so. (<hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi>, lib. ii.
cap. xxviii.)</note>
</p>

<p>
All this had an importance much beyond its immediate
effect in tempering the administration of the law. It contributed
largely to associate in the popular imagination the
ideas of sanctity and of mercy, and to increase the reverence
for human life. It had also another remarkable effect, to
which I have adverted in another work. The belief that it
was wrong for a priest to bring any charge that could give rise
to a capital sentence caused the leading clergy to shrink from
persecuting heresy to death, at a time when in all other
respects the theory of persecution had been fully matured.
When it was readily admitted that heresy was in the highest
degree criminal, and ought to be made penal, when laws banishing,
fining, or imprisoning heretics filled the statute-book,
and when every vestige of religious liberty was suppressed at
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
the instigation of the clergy, these still shrank from the last
and inevitable step, not because it was an atrocious violation
of the rights of conscience, but because it was contrary to the
ecclesiastical discipline for a bishop, under any circumstances,
to countenance bloodshed. It was on this ground that St.
Augustine, while eagerly advocating the persecution of the
Donatists, more than once expressed a wish that they should
not be punished with death, and that St. Ambrose, and St.
Martin of Tours, who were both energetic persecutors, expressed
their abhorrence of the Spanish bishops, who had
caused some Priscillianists to be executed. I have elsewhere
noticed the odious hypocrisy of the later inquisitors, who relegated
the execution of the sentence to the civil power, with
a prayer that the heretics should be punished <q>as mildly as
possible and without the effusion of blood,</q><note place='foot'><q>Ut quam clementissime et
ultra sanguinis effusionem puniretur.</q></note> which came at
last to be interpreted, by the death of fire; but I may here
add, that this hideous mockery is not unique in the history of
religion. Plutarch suggests that one of the reasons for burying
unchaste vestals alive was that they were so sacred that
it was unlawful to lay violent hands upon them,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Quæstœ. Romanæ</hi>, xcvi.</note> and among
the Donatists the Circumcelliones were for a time accustomed
to abstain, in obedience to the evangelical command, from the
use of the sword, while they beat to death those who differed
from their theological opinions with massive clubs, to which
they gave the very significant name of Israelites.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém. d'Hist. ecclés</hi>.
tome vi. pp. 88-98. The Donatists
after a time, however, are said to
have overcome their scruples, and
used swords.</note>
</p>

<p>
The time came when the Christian priests shed blood
enough. The extreme scrupulosity, however, which they at
first displayed, is not only exceedingly curious when contrasted
with their later history; it was also, by the association
of ideas which it promoted, very favourable to humanity.
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
It is remarkable, however, that while some of the early
Fathers were the undoubted precursors of Beccaria, their
teaching, unlike that of the philosophers in the eighteenth
century, had little or no appreciable influence in mitigating
the severity of the penal code. Indeed, the more carefully
the Christian legislation of the Empire is examined, and the
more fully it is compared with what had been done under
the influence of Stoicism by the Pagan legislators, the more
evident, I think, it will appear that the golden age of Roman
law was not Christian, but Pagan. Great works of codification
were accomplished under the younger Theodosius, and
under Justinian; but it was in the reign of Pagan emperors,
and especially of Hadrian and Alexander Severus, that
nearly all the most important measures were taken, redressing
injustices, elevating oppressed classes, and making the
doctrine of the natural equality and fraternity of mankind
the basis of legal enactments. Receiving the heritage of
these laws, the Christians, no doubt, added something; but a
careful examination will show that it was surprisingly little.
In no respect is the greatness of the Stoic philosophers more
conspicuous than in the contrast between the gigantic steps
of legal reform made in a few years under their influence,
and the almost insignificant steps taken when Christianity
had obtained an ascendancy in the Empire, not to speak of
the long period of decrepitude that followed. In the way of
mitigating the severity of punishments, Constantine made,
it is true, three important laws prohibiting the custom of
branding criminals upon the face, the condemnation of
criminals as gladiators, and the continuance of the once
degrading but now sacred punishment of crucifixion, which
had been very commonly employed; but these measures
were more than counterbalanced by the extreme severity
with which the Christian emperors punished infanticide,
adultery, seduction, rape, and several other crimes, and
the number of capital offences became considerably greater
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
than before.<note place='foot'>Under the Christian kings, the
barbarians multiplied the number
of capital offences, but this has
usually been regarded as an improvement.
The Abbé Mably says:
<q>Quoiqu'il nous reste peu d'ordonnances
faites sous les premiers
Mérovingiens, nous voyons qu'avant
la fin du sixième siècle, les François
avoient déjà adopté la doctrine
salutaire des Romains au sujet
de la prescription; et que renonçant
à cette humanité cruelle qui
les enhardissoit au mal, ils infligèrent
peine de mort contre l'inceste,
le vol et le meurtre qui jusques-là
n'avoient été punis que par l'exil,
ou dont on se rachetoit par une
composition. Les François, en réformant
quelques-unes de leurs lois
civiles, portèrent la sévérité aussi
loin que leurs pères avoient poussé
l'indulgence.</q>&mdash;Mably, <hi rend='italic'>Observ. sur
l'Hist. des François</hi>, liv. i. ch. iii.
See, too, Gibbon's <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>,
ch. xxxviii.</note> The most prominent evidence, indeed, of ecclesiastical
influence in the Theodosian code is that which must
be most lamented. It is the immense mass of legislation,
intended on the one hand to elevate the clergy into a
separate and sacred caste, and on the other to persecute in
every form, and with every degree of violence, all who
deviated from the fine line of Catholic orthodoxy.<note place='foot'>The whole of the sixth volume
of Godefroy's edition (folio) of the
Theodosian code is taken up with
laws of these kinds.</note>
</p>

<p>
The last consequence of the Christian estimate of human
life was a very emphatic condemnation of suicide. We have
already seen that the arguments of the Pagan moralists, who
were opposed to this act, were of four kinds. The religious
argument of Pythagoras and Plato was, that we are all
soldiers of God, placed in an appointed post of duty, which it
is a rebellion against our Maker to desert. The civic argument
of Aristotle and the Greek legislators was that we owe
our services to the State, and that therefore voluntarily to
abandon life is to abandon our duty to our country. The
argument which Plutarch and other writers derived from
human dignity was that true courage is shown in the
manful endurance of suffering, while suicide, being an act of
flight, is an act of cowardice, and therefore unworthy of man.
The mystical or Quietist argument of the Neoplatonists was
that all perturbation is a pollution of the soul; that the act
of suicide is accompanied by, and springs from, perturbation,
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
and that therefore the perpetrator ends his days by a crime.
Of these four arguments, the last cannot, I think, be said to
have had any place among the Christian dissuasives from
suicide, and the influence of the second was almost imperceptible.
The notion of patriotism being a moral duty was
habitually discouraged in the early Church; and it was impossible
to urge the civic argument against suicide without
at the same time condemning the hermit life, which in the
third century became the ideal of the Church. The duty a
man owes to his family, which a modern moralist would deem
the most obvious and, perhaps, the most conclusive proof of
the general criminality of suicide, and which may be said to
have replaced the civic argument, was scarcely noticed
either by the Pagans or the early Christians. The first
were accustomed to lay so much stress upon the authority,
that they scarcely recognised the duties, of the father; and
the latter were too anxious to attach all their ethics to the
interests of another world, to do much to supply the omission.
The Christian estimate of the duty of humility, and
of the degradation of man, rendered appeals to human dignity
somewhat uncongenial to the patristic writers; yet these
writers frequently dilated upon the true courage of patience,
in language to which their own heroism under persecution
gave a noble emphasis. To the example of Cato they opposed
those of Regulus and Job, the courage that endures suffering
to the courage that confronts death. The Platonic doctrine,
that we are servants of the Deity, placed upon earth to perform
our allotted task in His sight, with His assistance, and
by His will, they continually enforced and most deeply
realised; and this doctrine was in itself, in most cases,
a sufficient preventive; for, as a great writer has said:
<q>Though there are many crimes of a deeper dye than suicide,
there is no other by which men appear so formally to renounce
the protection of God.</q><note place='foot'>Mme. de Staël, <hi rend='italic'>Réflexions sur le Suicide</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
But, in addition to this general teaching, the Christian
theologians introduced into the sphere we are considering
new elements both of terrorism and of persuasion, which
have had a decisive influence upon the judgments of mankind.
They carried their doctrine of the sanctity of human life to
such a point that they maintained dogmatically that a man
who destroys his own life has committed a crime similar
both in kind and magnitude to that of an ordinary murderer,<note place='foot'>The following became the
theological doctrine on the subject:
<q>Est vere homicida et reus
homicidii qui se interficiendo innocentum
hominem interfecerit.</q>&mdash;Lisle,
<hi rend='italic'>Du Suicide</hi>, p. 400. St. Augustine
has much in this strain.
Lucretia, he says, either consented
to the act of Sextius, or she did
not. In the first case she was an
adulteress, and should therefore
not be admired. In the second
case she was a murderess, because
in killing herself she killed an
innocent and virtuous woman.
(<hi rend='italic'>De Civ. Dei</hi>, i. 19.)</note>
and they at the same time gave a new character to
death by their doctrines concerning its penal nature and
concerning the future destinies of the soul. On the other
hand, the high position assigned to resignation in the moral
scale, the hope of future happiness, which casts a ray of
light upon the darkest calamities of life, the deeper and more
subtle consolations arising from the feeling of trust and from
the outpouring of prayer, and, above all, the Christian doctrine
of the remedial and providential character of suffering,
have proved sufficient protection against despair. The
Christian doctrine, that pain is a good, had in this respect
an influence that was never attained by the Pagan doctrine,
that pain is not an evil.
</p>

<p>
There were, however, two forms of suicide which were
regarded in the early Church with some tolerance or hesitation.
During the frenzy excited by persecution, and under
the influence of the belief that martyrdom effaced in a moment
the sins of a life, and introduced the sufferer at once
into celestial joys, it was not uncommon for men, in a transport
of enthusiasm, to rush before the Pagan judges, imploring
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
or provoking martyrdom; and some of the ecclesiastical
writers have spoken of these men with considerable admiration,<note place='foot'>Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and
Cyprian are especially ardent in
this respect; but their language
is, I think, in their circumstances,
extremely excusable. Compare
Barbeyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Morale des Pères</hi>, ch. ii.
§ 8; ch. viii. §§ 34-39. Donne's
<hi rend='italic'>Biathanatos</hi> (ed. 1644), pp. 58-67.
Cromaziano, <hi rend='italic'>Istoria critica e filosofica
del Suicidio ragionato</hi> (Venezia,
1788), pp. 135-140.</note>
though the general tone of the patristic writings and
the councils of the Church condemned them. A more serious
difficulty arose about Christian women who committed suicide
to guard their chastity when menaced by the infamous sentences
of their persecutors, or more frequently by the lust of
emperors, or by barbarian invaders. St. Pelagia, a girl of only
fifteen, who has been canonised by the Church, and who was
warmly eulogised by St. Ambrose and St. Chrysostom,
having been captured by the soldiery, obtained permission
to retire to her room for the purpose of robing herself,
mounted to the roof of the house, and, flinging herself down,
perished by the fall.<note place='foot'>Ambrose, <hi rend='italic'>De Virginibus</hi>, iii. 7.</note> A Christian lady of Antioch, named
Domnina, had two daughters renowned alike for their beauty
and their piety. Being captured during the Diocletian persecution,
and fearing the loss of their chastity, they agreed by one
bold act to free themselves from the danger, and, casting themselves
into a river by the way, mother and daughters sank
unsullied in the wave.<note place='foot'>Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Eccles. Hist.</hi> viii. 12.</note> The tyrant Maxentius was fascinated
by the beauty of a Christian lady, the wife of the
Prefect of Rome. Having sought in vain to elude his
addresses, having been dragged from her house by the
minions of the tyrant, the faithful wife obtained permission,
before yielding to her master's embraces, to retire for a
moment into her chamber, and she there, with true Roman
courage, stabbed herself to the heart.<note place='foot'>Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Eccles. Hist.</hi> viii.
14. Bayle, in his article upon
Sophronia, appears to be greatly
scandalised at this act, and it seems
that among the Catholics it is not
considered right to admire this
poor lady as much as her sister
suicides. Tillemont remarks:
<q>Comme on ne voit pas que l'église
romaine l'ait jamais honorée, nous
n'avons pas le mesme droit de justifier
son action.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist. ecclés.</hi>
tome v. pp. 404, 405.</note> Some Protestant
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
controversialists have been scandalised,<note place='foot'>Especially Barbeyrac in his
<hi rend='italic'>Morale des Pères</hi>. He was answered by
Ceillier, Cromaziano,
and others. Matthew of Westminster
relates of Ebba, the abbess
of a Yorkshire convent which
was besieged by the Danes, that
she and all the other nuns, to save
their chastity, deformed themselves
by cutting off their noses and upper
lips. (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 870.)</note> and some Catholic
controversialists perplexed, by the undisguised admiration
with which the early ecclesiastical writers narrate these histories.
To those who have not suffered theological opinions
to destroy all their natural sense of nobility it will need
no defence.
</p>

<p>
This was the only form of avowed suicide which was in
any degree permitted in the early Church. St. Ambrose
rather timidly, and St. Jerome more strongly, commended
it; but at the time when the capture of Rome by the soldiers
of Alaric made the question one of pressing interest, St.
Augustine devoted an elaborate examination to the subject,
and while expressing his pitying admiration for the virgin
suicides, decidedly condemned their act.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Civ. Dei</hi>, i. 22-7.</note> His opinion of
the absolute sinfulness of suicide has since been generally
adopted by the Catholic theologians, who pretend that Pelagia
and Domnina acted under the impulse of a special revelation.<note place='foot'>This had been suggested by
St. Augustine. In the case of
Pelagia, Tillemont finds a strong
argument in support of this view
in the astounding, if not miraculous,
fact that, having thrown herself
from the top of the house, she
was actually killed by the fall!
<q>Estant montée tout au haut de sa
maison, fortifiée par le mouvement
que J.-C. formoit dans son cœur et
par le courage qu'il luy inspiroit,
elle se précipita de là du haut en
bas, et échapa ainsi à tous les
piéges de ses ennemis. Son corps
en tombant à terre frapa, dit S.
Chrysostome, les yeux du démon
plus vivement qu'un éclair....
Ce qui marque encore que Dieu
agissoit en tout ceci c'est qu'au
lieu que ces chutes ne sont pas
toujours mortelles, ou que souvent
ne brisant que quelques membres,
elles n'ostent la vie que longtemps
après, ni l'un ni l'autre n'arriva en
cette rencontre; mais Dieu retira
aussitost l'âme de la sainte, en
sorte que sa mort parut autant
l'effet de la volonté divine que de
sa chute.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist. ecclés.</hi> tome v.
pp. 401-402.</note>
At the same time, by a glaring though very natural
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
inconsistency, no characters were more enthusiastically extolled
than those anchorites who habitually deprived their
bodies of the sustenance that was absolutely necessary to
health, and thus manifestly abridged their lives. St. Jerome
has preserved a curious illustration of the feeling with which
these slow suicides were regarded by the outer world, in
his account of the life and death of a young nun named
Blesilla. This lady had been guilty of what, according to
the religious notions of the fourth century, was, at least, the
frivolity of marrying, but was left a widow seven months
afterwards, having thus <q>lost at once the crown of virginity
and the pleasure of marriage.</q><note place='foot'><q>Et virginitatis coronam et
nuptiarum perdidit voluptatem.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
xxii.</note> An attack of illness inspired
her with strong religious feelings. At the age of twenty she
retired to a convent. She attained such a height of devotion
that, according to the very characteristic eulogy of her biographer,
<q>she was more sorry for the loss of her virginity
than for the decease of her husband;</q><note place='foot'><q>Quis enim siccis oculis recordetur
viginti annorum adolescentulam
tam ardenti fide crucis
levasse vexillum ut magis amissam
virginitatem quam mariti doleret
interitum?</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxxix.</note> and a long succession
of atrocious penances preceded, if they did not produce,
her death.<note place='foot'>For a description of these
penances, see <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxxviii.</note> The conviction that she had been killed by fasting,
and the spectacle of the uncontrollable grief of her mother,
filled the populace with indignation, and the funeral was
disturbed by tumultuous cries that the <q>accursed race of
monks should be banished from the city, stoned, or drowned.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxxix.</note>
In the Church itself, however, we find very few traces of any
condemnation of the custom of undermining the constitution
by austerities,<note place='foot'>St. Jerome gave some sensible
advice on this point to one of his
admirers. (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxv.)</note> and if we may believe but a small part of
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
what is related of the habits of the early and mediæval monks,
great numbers of them must have thus shortened their days.
There is a touching story told by St. Bonaventura, of St.
Francis Assisi, who was one of these victims to asceticism.
As the dying saint sank back exhausted with spitting blood, he
avowed, as he looked upon his emaciated body, that <q>he had
sinned against his brother, the ass;</q> and then, the feeling of
his mind taking, as was usual with him, the form of an hallucination,
he imagined that, when at prayer during the night,
he heard a voice saying: <q>Francis, there is no sinner in the
world whom, if he be converted, God will not pardon; but
he who kills himself by hard penances will find no mercy in
eternity.</q> He attributed the voice to the devil.<note place='foot'>Hase, <hi rend='italic'>St. François d'Assise</hi>,
pp. 137-138. St. Palæmon is said
to have died of his austerities.
(<hi rend='italic'>Vit. S. Pachomii.</hi>)</note>
</p>

<p>
Direct and deliberate suicide, which occupies so prominent
a place in the moral history of antiquity, almost absolutely
disappeared within the Church; but beyond its pale
the Circumcelliones, in the fourth century, constituted themselves
the apostles of death, and not only carried to the highest
point the custom of provoking martyrdom, by challenging and
insulting the assemblies of the Pagans, but even killed themselves
in great numbers, imagining, it would seem, that this
was a form of martyrdom, and would secure for them eternal
salvation. Assembling in hundreds, St. Augustine says even
in thousands, they leaped with paroxysms of frantic joy from
the brows of overhanging cliffs, till the rocks below were reddened
with their blood.<note place='foot'>St. Augustine and St. Optatus
have given accounts of these suicides
in their works against the
Donatists.</note> At a much later period, we find
among the Albigenses a practice, known by the name of
Endura, of accelerating death, in the case of dangerous illness,
by fasting, and sometimes by bleeding.<note place='foot'>See Todd's <hi rend='italic'>Life of St. Patrick</hi>,
p. 462.</note> The wretched Jews,
stung to madness by the persecution of the Catholics, furnish
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
the most numerous examples of suicide during the middle
ages. A multitude perished by their own hands, to avoid
torture, in France, in 1095; five hundred, it is said, on a
single occasion at York; five hundred in 1320, when besieged
by the Shepherds. The old Pagan legislation on this subject
remained unaltered in the Theodosian and Justinian codes;
but a Council of Arles, in the fifth century, having pronounced
suicide to be the effect of diabolical inspiration, a Council of
Bragues, in the following century, ordained that no religious
rites should be celebrated at the tomb of the culprit, and that
no masses should be said for his soul; and these provisions,
which were repeated by later Councils, were gradually introduced
into the laws of the barbarians and of Charlemagne. St.
Lewis originated the custom of confiscating the property of the
dead man, and the corpse was soon subjected to gross and various
outrages. In some countries it could only be removed from
the house through a perforation specially made for the occasion
in the wall; it was dragged upon a hurdle through the streets,
hung up with the head downwards, and at last thrown into
the public sewer, or burnt, or buried in the sand below
high-water mark, or transfixed by a stake on the public
highway.<note place='foot'>The whole history of suicide
in the dark ages has been most
minutely and carefully examined
by M. Bourquelot, in a very interesting
series of memoirs in the
third and fourth volumes of the
<hi rend='italic'>Bibliothèque de l'École des Chartes</hi>.
I am much indebted to these memoirs
in the following pages. See,
too, Lisle, <hi rend='italic'>Du Suicide, Statistique,
Médecine, Histoire, et Législation</hi>.
(Paris, 1856.) The ferocious laws
here recounted contrast remarkably
with a law in the Capitularies (lib.
vi. lex 70), which provides that
though mass may not be celebrated
for a suicide, any private person
may, through charity, cause prayers
to be offered up for his soul.
<q>Quia incomprehensibilia sunt judicia
Dei, et profunditatem consilii
ejus nemo potest investigare.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
These singularly hideous and at the same time grotesque
customs, and also the extreme injustice of reducing to beggary
the unhappy relations of the dead, had the very natural
effect of exciting, in the eighteenth century, a strong spirit of
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
reaction. Suicide is indeed one of those acts which may be
condemned by moralists as a sin, but which, in modern times
at least, cannot be regarded as within the legitimate sphere
of law; for a society which accords to its members perfect
liberty of emigration, cannot reasonably pronounce the simple
renunciation of life to be an offence against itself. When,
however, Beccaria and his followers went further, and maintained
that the mediæval laws on the subject were as impotent
as they were revolting, they fell, I think, into serious error.
The outrages lavished upon the corpse of the suicide, though
in the first instance an expression of the popular horror of
his act, contributed, by the associations they formed, to
strengthen the feeling that produced them, and they were
also peculiarly fitted to scare the diseased, excited, and oversensitive
imaginations that are most prone to suicide. In the
rare occasions when the act was deliberately contemplated,
the knowledge that religious, legislative, and social influences
would combine to aggravate to the utmost the agony of the
surviving relatives, must have had great weight. The activity
of the Legislature shows the continuance of the act; but
we have every reason to believe that within the pale of
Catholicism it was for many centuries extremely rare. It is
said to have been somewhat prevalent in Spain in the last
and most corrupt period of the Gothic kingdom,<note place='foot'>See the very interesting work
of the Abbé Bourret, <hi rend='italic'>l'École chrétienne
de Séville sous la monarchie
des Visigoths</hi> (Paris, 1855), p. 196.</note> and many
instances occurred during a great pestilence which raged
in England in the seventh century,<note place='foot'>Roger of Wendover, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 665.</note> and also during the
Black Death of the fourteenth century.<note place='foot'>Esquirol, <hi rend='italic'>Maladies mentales</hi>,
tome i. p. 591.</note> When the wives
of priests were separated in vast numbers from their husbands
by Hildebrand, and driven into the world blasted,
heart-broken, and hopeless, not a few of them shortened
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
their agony by suicide.<note place='foot'>Lea's <hi rend='italic'>History of Sacerdotal
Celibacy</hi> (Philadelphia, 1867), p.
248.</note> Among women it was in general
especially rare; and a learned historian of suicide has even
asserted that a Spanish lady, who, being separated from her
husband, and finding herself unable to resist the energy of
her passions, killed herself rather than yield to temptation,
is the only instance of female suicide during several centuries.<note place='foot'><q>Per lo corso di molti secoli
abbiamo questo solo suicidio donnesco,
e buona cosa è non averne
più d'uno; perchè io non credo che
la impudicizia istessa sia peggiore
di questa disperata castità.</q>&mdash;Cromaziano,
<hi rend='italic'>Ist. del. Suicidio</hi>, p. 126.
Mariana, who, under the frock of
a Jesuit, bore the heart of an ancient
Roman, treats the case in a
very different manner. <q>Ejus
uxor Maria Coronelia cum mariti
absentiam non ferret, ne pravis
cupiditatibus cederet, vitam posuit,
ardentem forte libidinem igne extinguens
adacto per muliebria
titione; dignam meliori seculo
fœminam, insigne studium castitatis.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De
Rebus Hispan.</hi> xvi. 17.</note>
In the romances of chivalry, however, this mode of death is
frequently pourtrayed without horror,<note place='foot'>A number of passages are
cited by Bourquelot.</note> and its criminality
was discussed at considerable length by Abelard and St.
Thomas Aquinas, while Dante has devoted some fine lines to
painting the condition of suicides in hell, where they are also
frequently represented in the bas-reliefs of cathedrals. A
melancholy leading to desperation, and known to theologians
under the name of <q>acedia,</q> was not uncommon in monasteries,
and most of the recorded instances of mediæval suicides in
Catholicism were by monks. The frequent suicides of monks,
sometimes to escape the world, sometimes through despair at
their inability to quell the propensities of the body, sometimes
through insanity produced by their mode of life, and by their
dread of surrounding demons, were noticed in the early Church,<note place='foot'>This is noticed by St. Gregory
Nazianzen in a little poem which
is given in Migne's edition of <hi rend='italic'>The
Greek Fathers</hi>, tome xxxvii. p.
1459. St. Nilus and the biographer
of St. Pachomius speak of
these suicides, and St. Chrysostom
wrote a letter of consolation to a
young monk, named Stagirius,
which is still extant, encouraging
him to resist the temptation. See
Neander, <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiastical Hist.</hi> vol.
iii. pp. 319, 320.</note>
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
and a few examples have been gleaned, from the mediæval
chronicles,<note place='foot'>Bourquelot. Pinel notices
(<hi rend='italic'>Traité médico-philosophique sur
l'Aliénation mentale</hi> (2nd ed.), pp.
44-46) the numerous cases of insanity
still produced by strong
religious feeling; and the history of
the movements called <q>revivals,</q> in
the present century, supplies much
evidence to the same effect. Pinel
says, religious insanity tends peculiarly
to suicide (p. 265).</note> of suicides produced by the bitterness of hopeless
love, or by the derangement that follows extreme austerity.
These are, however, but few; and it is probable that the
monasteries, by providing a refuge for the disappointed and the
broken-hearted, have prevented more suicides than they have
caused, and that, during the whole period of Catholic ascendancy,
the act was more rare than before or after. The
influence of Catholicism was seconded by Mohammedanism,
which, on this as on many other points, borrowed its teaching
from the Christian Church, and even intensified it; for
suicide, which is never expressly condemned in the Bible, is
more than once forbidden in the Koran, and the Christian
duty of resignation was exaggerated by the Moslem into a
complete fatalism. Under the empire of Catholicism and
Mohammedanism, suicide, during many centuries, almost
absolutely ceased in all the civilised, active, and progressive
part of mankind. When we recollect how warmly it was
applauded, or how faintly it was condemned, in the civilisation
of Greece and Rome; when we remember, too, that
there was scarcely a barbarous tribe, from Denmark to Spain,
who did not habitually practise it,<note place='foot'>Orosius notices (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> v. 14)
that of all the Gauls conquered by
Q. Marcius, there were none who
did not prefer death to slavery.
The Spaniards were famous for
their suicides, to avoid old age as
well as slavery. Odin, who, under
different names, was the supreme
divinity of most of the Northern
tribes, is said to have ended his
earthly life by suicide. Boadicea,
the grandest figure of early British
history, and Cordeilla, or Cordelia,
the most pathetic figure of early
British romance, were both suicides.
(See on the first, Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> xiv. 35-37, and on the second
Geoffrey of Monmouth, ii. 15&mdash;a
version from which Shakspeare has
considerably diverged, but which is
faithfully followed by Spenser.
(<hi rend='italic'>Faëry Queen</hi>, book ii. canto 10.))</note> we may realise the complete
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
revolution which was effected in this sphere by the
influence of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
A few words may be added on the later phases of this
mournful history. The Reformation does not seem to have
had any immediate effect in multiplying suicide, for Protestants
and Catholics held with equal intensity the religious
sentiments which are most fitted to prevent it, and in none of
the persecutions was impatience of life largely displayed.
The history at this period passes chiefly into the new world,
where the unhappy Indians, reduced to slavery, and treated
with atrocious cruelty by their conquerors, killed themselves
in great numbers; till the Spaniards, it is said, discovered an
ingenious method of deterring them, by declaring that the
master also would commit suicide, and would pursue his
victims into the world of spirits.<note place='foot'><q>In our age, when the Spaniards
extended that law which was
made only against the cannibals,
that they who would not accept
the Christian religion should incur
bondage, the Indians in infinite
numbers escaped this by killing
themselves, and never ceased till
the Spaniards, by some counterfeitings,
made them think that
they also would kill themselves,
and follow them with the same
severity into the next life.</q>&mdash;Donne's
<hi rend='italic'>Biathanatos</hi>, p. 56 (ed.
1644). On the evidence of the
early travellers on this point, see
the essay on <q>England's Forgotten
Worthies,</q> in Mr. Froude's <hi rend='italic'>Short
Studies</hi>.</note> In Europe the act was very
common among the witches, who underwent all the sufferings
with none of the consolations of martyrdom. Without
enthusiasm, without hope, without even the consciousness of
innocence, decrepit in body, and distracted in mind, compelled
in this world to endure tortures, before which the
most impassioned heroism might quail, and doomed, as
they often believed, to eternal damnation in the next, they
not unfrequently killed themselves in the agony of their
despair. A French judge named Remy tells us that he knew
no less than fifteen witches commit suicide in a single year.<note place='foot'>Lisle, pp. 427-434. Sprenger
has noticed the same tendency
among the witches he tried. See
Calmeil, <hi rend='italic'>De la Folie</hi> (Paris, 1845),
tome i. pp. 161, 303-305.</note>
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
In these cases, fear and madness combined in urging the
victims to the deed. Epidemics of purely insane suicide
have also not unfrequently occurred. Both the women of
Marseilles and the women of Lyons were afflicted with an
epidemic not unlike that which, in antiquity, had been noticed
among the girls of Miletus.<note place='foot'>On modern suicides the reader
may consult Winslow's <hi rend='italic'>Anatomy of
Suicide</hi>; as well as the work of M.
Lisle, and also Esquirol, <hi rend='italic'>Maladies
mentales</hi> (Paris, 1838), tome i. pp.
526-676.</note> In that strange mania
which raged in the Neapolitan districts from the end of the
fifteenth to the end of the seventeenth century, and which
was attributed to the bite of the tarantula, the patients
thronged in multitudes towards the sea, and often, as the blue
waters opened to their view, they chanted a wild hymn of
welcome, and rushed with passion into the waves.<note place='foot'><p>Hecker's <hi rend='italic'>Epidemics of the
Middle Ages</hi> (London, 1844), p.
121. Hecker in his very curious
essay on this mania, has preserved
a verse of their song:&mdash;
</p>
<p><q>Allu mari mi portati<lb/>
Se voleti che mi sanati,<lb/>
Allu mari, alla via,<lb/>
Così m'ama la donna mia,<lb/>
Allu mari, allu mari,<lb/>
Mentre campo, t'aggio amari.</q></p></note> But
together with these cases, which belong rather to the history
of medicine than to that of morals, we find many facts exhibiting
a startling increase of deliberate suicide, and a no
less startling modification of the sentiments with which it
was regarded. The revival of classical learning, and the
growing custom of regarding Greek and Roman heroes as
ideals, necessarily brought the subject into prominence. The
Catholic casuists, and at a later period philosophers of the
school of Grotius and Puffendorf, began to distinguish certain
cases of legitimate suicide, such as that committed to avoid
dishonour or probable sin, or that of the soldier who fires a
mine, knowing he must inevitably perish by the explosion,
or that of a condemned person who saves himself from torture
by anticipating an inevitable fate, or that of a man who
offers himself to death for his friend.<note place='foot'>Cromaziano, <hi rend='italic'>Ist. del Suicidio</hi>
caps. viii, ix.</note> The effect of the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
Pagan examples may frequently be detected in the last
words or writings of the suicides. Philip Strozzi, when
accused of the assassination of Alexander I. of Tuscany,
killed himself through fear that torture might extort from
him revelations injurious to his friends, and he left behind
him a paper in which, among other things, he commended
his soul to God, with the prayer that, if no higher boon could
be granted, he might at least be permitted to have his place
with Cato of Utica and the other great suicides of antiquity.<note place='foot'>Cromaziano, pp. 92-93.</note>
In England, the act appears in the seventeenth century and in
the first half of the eighteenth to have been more common
than upon the Continent,<note place='foot'>Montesquieu, and many Continental
writers, have noticed this,
and most English writers of the
eighteenth century seem to admit
the charge. There do not appear,
however, to have been any accurate
statistics, and the general
statements are very untrustworthy.
Suicides were supposed to be
especially numerous under the depressing
influence of English winter
fogs. The statistics made in
the present century prove beyond
question that they are most numerous
in summer.</note> and several partial or even unqualified
apologies for it were written. Sir Thomas More, in
his <q>Utopia,</q> represented the priests and magistrates of his
ideal republic permitting or even enjoining those who were
afflicted with incurable disease to kill themselves, but depriving
of burial those who had done so without authorisation.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Utopia</hi>, book ii. ch. vi.</note>
Dr. Donne, the learned and pious Dean of St. Paul's,
had in his youth written an extremely curious, subtle, and
learned, but at the same time feeble and involved, work in
defence of suicide, which on his deathbed he commanded his
son neither to publish nor destroy, and which his son published
in 1644. Two or three English suicides left behind
them elaborate defences, as did also a Swede named Robeck,
who drowned himself in 1735, and whose treatise, published
in the following year, acquired considerable celebrity.<note place='foot'>A sketch of his life, which
was rather curious, is given by
Cromaziano, pp. 148-151. There
is a long note on the early literature
in defence of suicide, in Dumas,
<hi rend='italic'>Traité du Suicide</hi> (Amsterdam,
1723), pp. 148-149. Dumas was
a Protestant minister who wrote
against suicide. Among the
English apologists for suicide
(which he himself committed) was
Blount, the translator of the <hi rend='italic'>Life
of Apollonius of Tyana</hi>, and Creech,
an editor of Lucretius. Concerning
the former there is a note in
Bayle's <hi rend='italic'>Dict.</hi> art. <q>Apollonius.</q>
The latter is noticed by Voltaire in
his <hi rend='italic'>Lettres Philos.</hi> He wrote as a
memorandum on the margin of his
<q>Lucretius,</q> <q>N.B. When I have
finished my Commentary I must
kill myself;</q> which he accordingly
did&mdash;Voltaire says to imitate his
favourite author. (Voltaire, <hi rend='italic'>Dict.
phil.</hi> art. <q>Caton.</q>)</note> But
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
the most influential writings about suicide were those of the
French philosophers and revolutionists. Montaigne, without
discussing its abstract lawfulness, recounts, with much admiration,
many of the instances in antiquity.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essais</hi>, liv. ii. ch. xiii.</note> Montesquieu,
in a youthful work, defended it with ardent enthusiasm.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Lettres persanes</hi>, lxxvi.</note>
Rousseau devoted to the subject two letters of a burning and
passionate eloquence,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Héloïse</hi>, partie iii.
let. 21-22. Esquirol gives a curious
illustration of the way the
influence of Rousseau penetrated
through all classes. A little child
of thirteen committed suicide,
leaving a writing beginning: <q>Je
lègue mon âme a Rousseau, mon
corps à la terre.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Maladies mentales</hi>,
tome i. p. 588.</note> in the first of which he presented with
matchless power the arguments in its favour, while in the
second he denounced those arguments as sophistical, dilated
upon the impiety of abandoning the post of duty, and upon the
cowardice of despair, and with a deep knowledge of the human
heart revealed the selfishness that lies at the root of most
suicide, exhorting all who felt impelled to it to set about
some work for the good of others, in which they would
assuredly find relief. Voltaire, in the best-known couplet
he ever wrote, defends the act on occasions of extreme
necessity.<note place='foot'>In general, however, Voltaire
was extremely opposed to the philosophy
of despair, but he certainly
approved of some forms of suicide.
See the articles <q>Caton</q> and <q>Suicide,</q>
in his <hi rend='italic'>Dict. philos.</hi></note> Among the atheistical party it was warmly
eulogised, and Holbach and Deslandes were prominent as its
defenders. The rapid decomposition of religious opinions
weakened the popular sense of its enormity, and at the same
time the humanity of the age, and also a clearer sense of the
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
true limits of legislation, produced a reaction against the
horrible laws on the subject. Grotius had defended them.
Montesquieu at first denounced them with unqualified energy,
but in his later years in some degree modified his opinions.
Beccaria, who was, more than any other writer, the representative
of the opinions of the French school on such matters,
condemned them partly as unjust to the innocent
survivors, partly as incapable of deterring any man who was
resolved upon the act. Even in 1749, in the full blaze of
the philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier
dragged through the streets of Paris with his face to the
ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into
the sewers;<note place='foot'>Lisle, <hi rend='italic'>Du Suicide</hi>, pp. 411,
412.</note> and the laws were not abrogated till the Revolution,
which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. Amid the dramatic vicissitudes,
and the fierce enthusiasm of that period of convulsions,
suicides immediately multiplied. <q>The world,</q> it was said,
had been <q>empty since the Romans.</q><note place='foot'><q>Le monde est vide depuis les
Romains.</q>&mdash;St.-Just, <hi rend='italic'>Procés de
Danton</hi>.</note> For a brief period,
and in this one country, the action of Christianity appeared
suspended. Men seemed to be transported again into the
age of Paganism, and the suicides, though more theatrical,
were perpetrated with no less deliberation, and eulogised
with no less enthusiasm, than among the Stoics. But the
tide of revolution passed away, and with some qualifications
the old opinions resumed their authority. The laws against
suicide were, indeed, for the most part abolished. In France
and several other lands there exists no legislation on the
subject. In other countries the law simply enjoins burial
without religious ceremonies. In England, the burial in a
highway and the mutilation by a stake were abolished under
George IV.; but the monstrous injustice of confiscating to
the Crown the entire property of the deliberate suicide still
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
disgraces the statute-book, though the force of public opinion
and the charitable perjury of juries render it inoperative.
</p>

<p>
The common sentiment of Christendom has, however,
ratified the judgment which the Christian teachers pronounced
upon the act, though it has somewhat modified the severity of
the old censure, and has abandoned some of the old arguments.
It was reserved for Madame de Staël, who, in a youthful
work upon the Passions, had commended suicide, to reconstruct
this department of ethics, which had been somewhat
disturbed by the Revolution, and she did so in a little treatise
which is a model of calm, candid, and philosophic piety.
Frankly abandoning the old theological notions that the
deed is of the nature of murder, that it is the worst
of crimes, and that it is always, or even generally, the
offspring of cowardice; abandoning, too, all attempts to
scare men by religious terrorism, she proceeded, not so much
to meet in detail the isolated arguments of its defenders,
as to sketch the ideal of a truly virtuous man, and to show
how such a character would secure men against all temptation
to suicide. In pages of the most tender beauty, she
traced the influence of suffering in softening, purifying, and
deepening the character, and showed how a frame of habitual
and submissive resignation was not only the highest
duty, but also the source of the purest consolation, and at
the same time the appointed condition of moral amelioration.
Having examined in detail the Biblical aspect of
the question, she proceeded to show how the true measure
of the dignity of man is his unselfishness. She contrasted
the martyr with the suicide&mdash;the death which springs from
devotion to duty with the death that springs from rebellion
against circumstances. The suicide of Cato, which
had been absurdly denounced by a crowd of ecclesiastics as
an act of cowardice, and as absurdly alleged by many suicides
as a justification for flying from pain or poverty, she represented
as an act of martyrdom&mdash;a death like that of
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
Curtius, accepted nobly for the benefit of Rome. The eye
of the good man should be for ever fixed upon the interest of
others. For them he should be prepared to relinquish life
with all its blessings. For them he should be prepared to
tolerate life, even when it seemed to him a curse.
</p>

<p>
Sentiments of this kind have, through the influence of
Christianity, thoroughly pervaded European society, and
suicide, in modern times, is almost always found to have
sprung either from absolute insanity; from diseases which,
though not amounting to insanity, are yet sufficient to discolour
our judgments; or from that last excess of sorrow,
when resignation and hope are both extinct. Considering it
in this light, I know few things more fitted to qualify the
optimism we so often hear than the fact that statistics show
it to be rapidly increasing, and to be peculiarly characteristic
of those nations which rank most high in intellectual development
and in general civilisation.<note place='foot'>This fact has been often noticed.
The reader may find many
statistics on the subject in Lisle,
<hi rend='italic'>Du Suicide</hi>, and Winslow's <hi rend='italic'>Anatomy
of Suicide</hi>.</note> In one or two countries,
strong religious feeling has counteracted the tendency; but
the comparison of town and country, of different countries, of
different provinces of the same country, and of different periods
in history, proves conclusively its reality. Many reasons may
be alleged to explain it. Mental occupations are peculiarly
fitted to produce insanity,<note place='foot'><q>There seems good reason to
believe, that with the progress of
mental development through the
ages, there is, as in the case with
other forms of organic development,
a correlative degeneration
going on, and that an increase of
insanity is a penalty which an
increase of our present civilisation
necessarily pays.</q>&mdash;Maudsley's
<hi rend='italic'>Physiology of Mind</hi>, p. 201.</note> and the blaze of publicity, which
in modern time encircles an act of suicide, to draw weak
minds to its imitation. If we put the condition of absolutely
savage life, out of our calculation, it is probable that a highly
developed civilisation, while it raises the average of well-being,
is accompanied by more extreme misery and acute sufferings
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
than the simpler stages that had preceded it. Nomadic
habits, the vast agglomeration of men in cities, the pressure
of a fierce competition, and the sudden fluctuations to which
manufactures are peculiarly liable, are the conditions of great
prosperity, but also the causes of the most profound misery.
Civilisation makes many of what once were superfluities,
necessaries of life, so that their loss inflicts a pang long after
their possession had ceased to be a pleasure. It also, by
softening the character, renders it peculiarly sensitive to pain,
and it brings with it a long train of antipathies, passions,
and diseased imaginations, which rarely or never cross the
thoughts or torture the nerves of the simple peasant. The
advance of religious scepticism, and the relaxation of religious
discipline, have weakened and sometimes destroyed the horror
of suicide; and the habits of self-assertion, the eager and
restless ambitions which political liberty, intellectual activity,
and manufacturing enterprise, all in their different ways
conspire to foster, while they are the very principles and
conditions of the progress of our age, render the virtue of
content in all its forms extremely rare, and are peculiarly
unpropitious to the formation of that spirit of humble and
submissive resignation which alone can mitigate the agony of
hopeless suffering.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
From examining the effect of Christianity in promoting
a sense of the sanctity of human life, we may now pass to an
adjoining field, and examine its influence in promoting a fraternal
and philanthropic sentiment among mankind. And
first of all we may notice its effects upon slavery.
</p>

<p>
The reader will remember the general position this institution
occupied in the eyes of the Stoic moralists, and under
the legislation which they had in a great measure inspired.
The legitimacy of slavery was fully recognised; but Seneca
and other moralists had asserted, in the very strongest terms,
the natural equality of mankind, the superficial character of
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
the differences between the slave and his master, and the
duty of the most scrupulous humanity to the former. Instances
of a very warm sympathy between master and slave
were of frequent occurrence; but they may unfortunately be
paralleled by not a few examples of the most atrocious cruelty.
To guard against such cruelty, a long series of enactments,
based avowedly upon the Stoical principle of the essential
equality of mankind, had been made under Hadrian, the
Antonines, and Alexander Severus. Not to recapitulate at
length what has been mentioned in a former chapter, it is
sufficient to remind the reader that the right of life and death
had been definitely withdrawn from the master, and that the
murder of a slave was stigmatised and punished by the law.
It had, however, been laid down, by the great lawyer Paul,
that homicide implies an intention to kill, and that therefore
the master was not guilty of that crime if his slave died
under chastisement which was not administered with this
intention. But the licence of punishment which this decision
might give was checked by laws which forbade excessive
cruelty to slaves, provided that, when it was proved, they
should be sold to another master, suppressed the private
prisons in which they had been immured, and appointed
special officers to receive their complaints.
</p>

<p>
In the field of legislation, for about two hundred years
after the conversion of Constantine, the progress was extremely
slight. The Christian emperors, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 319 and
326, adverted in two elaborate laws to the subject of the
murder of slaves,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 12.</note> but, beyond reiterating in very emphatic
terms the previous enactments, it is not easy to see in what
way they improved the condition of the class.<note place='foot'>Some commentators imagine
(see Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antich. Ital. Diss.</hi>
xiv.) that among the Pagans the
murder of a man's own slave was
only assimilated to the crime of
murdering the slave of another man,
while in the Christian law it was
defined as homicide, equivalent to
the murder of a freeman. I confess,
however, this point does not
appear to me at all clear.</note> They provided
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
that any master who applied to his slave certain
atrocious tortures, that are enumerated, with the object of
killing him, should be deemed a homicide, but if the slave
died under moderate punishment, or under any punishment
not intended to kill him, the master should be blameless; no
charge whatever, it was emphatically said, should be brought
against him. It has been supposed, though I think without
evidence, by commentators<note place='foot'>See Godefroy's <hi rend='italic'>Commentary</hi> on
these laws.</note> that this law accorded immunity
to the master only when the slave perished under the application
of <q>appropriate</q> or servile punishments&mdash;that is to
say, scourging, irons, or imprisonment; but the use of torture
not intended to kill was in no degree restricted, nor is there
anything in the law to make it appear either that the master
was liable to punishment, if contrary to his intention his
slave succumbed beneath torture, or that Constantine proposed
any penalty for excessive cruelty which did not result
in death. It is, perhaps, not out of place to observe, that this
law was in remarkable harmony with the well-known article
of the Jewish code, which provided that if a slave, wounded
to death by his master, linger for a day or two, the master
should not be punished, for the slave was his money.<note place='foot'>Exodus xxi. 21</note>
</p>

<p>
The two features that were most revolting in the slave
system, as it passed from the Pagan to the Christian emperors,
were the absolute want of legal recognition of slave marriage,
and the licence of torturing still conceded to the master.
The Christian emperors before Justinian took no serious
steps to remedy either of these evils, and the measures that
were taken against adultery still continued inapplicable to
slave unions, because <q>the vileness of their condition makes
them unworthy of the observation of the law.</q><note place='foot'><p><q>Quas vilitates vitæ dignas
legum observatione non credidit.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cod.
Theod.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 7. See on
this law, Wallon, tome iii. pp. 417,
418.
</p>
<p>
Dean Milman observes, <q>In the
old Roman society in the Eastern
Empire this distinction between the
marriage of the freeman and the
concubinage of the slave was long
recognised by Christianity itself.
These unions were not blessed, as
the marriages of their superiors had
soon begun to be, by the Church.
Basil the Macedonian (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 867-886)
first enacted that the priestly
benediction should hallow the marriage
of the slave; but the authority
of the emperor was counteracted
by the deep-rooted prejudices
of centuries.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 15.</p></note> The abolition
of the punishment of crucifixion had, however, a special
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
value to the slave class, and a very merciful law of Constantine
forbade the separation of the families of the slaves.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. ii. tit. 25.</note>
Another law, which in its effects was perhaps still more
important, imparted a sacred character to manumission,
ordaining that the ceremony should be celebrated in the
Church,<note place='foot'>Ibid. lib. iv. tit. 7.</note> and permitting it on Sundays. Some measures
were also taken, providing for the freedom of the Christian
slaves of Jewish masters, and, in two or three cases, freedom
was offered as a bribe to slaves, to induce them to inform
against criminals. Intermarriage between the free and slave
classes was still strictly forbidden, and if a free woman had
improper intercourse with her slave, Constantine ordered
that the woman should be executed and the slave burnt
alive.<note place='foot'>Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 9.</note> By the Pagan law, the woman had been simply reduced
to slavery. The laws against fugitive slaves were also
rendered more severe.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Corpus Juris</hi>, vi. 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
This legislation may on the whole be looked upon as a
progress, but it certainly does not deserve the enthusiasm
which ecclesiastical writers have sometimes bestowed upon
it. For about two hundred years, there was an almost absolute
pause in the legislation on this subject. Some slight
restrictions were, however, imposed upon the use of torture
in trials; some slight additional facilities of manumission
were given, and some very atrocious enactments made to
prevent slaves accusing their masters. According to that of
Gratian, any slave who accused his master of any offence,
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
except high treason, should immediately be burnt alive,
without any investigation of the justice of the charge.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. vi. tit. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
Under Justinian, however, new and very important measures
were taken. In no other sphere were the laws of this
emperor so indisputably an advance upon those of his predecessors.
His measures may be comprised under three heads.
In the first place, all the restrictions upon enfranchisement
which had accumulated under the Pagan legislation were
abolished; the legislator proclaimed in emphatic language,
and by the provisions of many laws, his desire to encourage
manumission, and free scope was thus given to the action
of the Church. In the second place, the freedmen, considered
as an intermediate class between the slave and the citizen,
were virtually abolished, all or nearly all the privileges
accorded to the citizen being granted to the emancipated
slave. This was the most important contribution of the
Christian emperors to that great amalgamation of nations
and classes which had been advancing since the days of Augustus;
and one of its effects was, that any person, even of
senatorial rank, might marry a slave when he had first
emancipated her. In the third place, a slave was permitted
to marry a free woman with the authorisation of his master,
and children born in slavery became the legal heirs of
their emancipated father. The rape of a slave woman was
also in this reign punished, like that of a free woman, by
death.<note place='foot'>See on all this legislation,
Wallon, tome iii.; Champagny,
<hi rend='italic'>Charité chrétienne</hi>, pp. 214-224.</note>
</p>

<p>
But, important as were these measures, it is not in the
field of legislation that we must chiefly look for the influence
of Christianity upon slavery. This influence was indeed very
great, but it is necessary carefully to define its nature. The
prohibition of all slavery, which was one of the peculiarities
of the Jewish Essenes, and the illegitimacy of hereditary
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
slavery, which was one of the speculations of the Stoic Dion
Chrysostom, had no place in the ecclesiastical teaching.
Slavery was distinctly and formally recognised by Christianity,<note place='foot'>It is worthy of notice, too, that
the justice of slavery was frequently
based by the Fathers, as by modern
defenders of slavery, on the curse
of Ham. See a number of passages
noticed by Moehler, <hi rend='italic'>Le Christianisme
et l'Esclavage</hi> (trad. franç.),
pp. 151-152.</note>
and no religion ever laboured more to encourage a
habit of docility and passive obedience. Much was indeed
said by the Fathers about the natural equality of mankind,
about the duty of regarding slaves as brothers or companions,
and about the heinousness of cruelty to them; but all this
had been said with at least equal force, though it had not been
disseminated over an equally wide area, by Seneca and Epictetus,
and the principle of the original freedom of all men was
repeatedly averred by the Pagan lawyers. The services of
Christianity in this sphere were of three kinds. It supplied
a new order of relations, in which the distinction of classes
was unknown. It imparted a moral dignity to the servile
classes, and it gave an unexampled impetus to the movement
of enfranchisement.
</p>

<p>
The first of these services was effected by the Church
ceremonies and the penitential discipline. In these spheres,
from which the Christian mind derived its earliest, its
deepest, and its most enduring impressions, the difference
between the master and his slave was unknown. They received
the sacred elements together, they sat side by side at
the agape, they mingled in the public prayers. In the penal
system of the Church, the distinction between wrongs done
to a freeman, and wrongs done to a slave, which lay at the
very root of the whole civil legislation, was repudiated. At
a time when, by the civil law, a master, whose slave died as
a consequence of excessive scourging, was absolutely unpunished,
the Council of Illiberis excluded that master for
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
ever from the communion.<note place='foot'><p>The penalty, however, appears
to have been reduced to two years'
exclusion from communion. Muratori
says: <q>In più consili si truova
decretato, <q>excommunicatione vel
pœnitentiæ biennii esse subjiciendum
qui servum proprium sine conscientia
judicis occiderit.</q></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Antich.
Ital.</hi> Diss. xiv.
</p>
<p>
Besides the works which treat
generally of the penitential discipline,
the reader may consult with
fruit Wright's letter <hi rend='italic'>On the Political
Condition of the English Peasantry</hi>,
and Moehler, p. 186.</p></note> The chastity of female slaves,
for the protection of which the civil law made but little provision,
was sedulously guarded by the legislation of the Church.
Slave birth, moreover, was no disqualification for entering
into the priesthood; and an emancipated slave, regarded as
the dispenser of spiritual life and death, often saw the
greatest and the most wealthy kneeling humbly at his feet
imploring his absolution or his benediction.<note place='foot'>On the great multitude of
emancipated slaves who entered, and
at one time almost monopolised, the
ecclesiastical offices, compare Moehler,
<hi rend='italic'>Le Christianisme et l'Esclavage</hi>,
pp. 177-178. Leo the Great tried
to prevent slaves being raised to
the priestly office, because it would
degrade the latter.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the next place, Christianity imparted a moral dignity
to the servile class. It did this not only by associating
poverty and labour with that monastic life which was so profoundly
revered, but also by introducing new modifications
into the ideal type of morals. There is no fact more prominent
in the Roman writers than the profound contempt with
which they regarded slaves, not so much on account of their
position, as on account of the character which that position
had formed. A servile character was a synonym for a vicious
one. Cicero had declared that nothing great or noble could
exist in a slave, and the plays of Plautus exhibit the same estimate
in every scene. There were, it is true, some exceptions.
Epictetus had not only been, but had been recognised as one of
the noblest characters of Rome. The fidelity of slaves to
their masters had been frequently extolled, and Seneca in
this, as in other respects, had been the defender of the oppressed.
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
Still there can be no doubt that this contempt was
general, and also that in the Pagan world it was to a great
extent just. Every age has its own moral ideal, to which all
virtuous men aspire. Every sphere of life has also a tendency
to produce a distinctive type being specially favourable
to some particular class of virtues, and specially unfavourable
to others. The popular estimate, and even the real moral
condition, of each class depends chiefly upon the degree in
which the type of character its position naturally develops,
coincides with the ideal type of the age. Now, if we remember
that magnanimity, self-reliance, dignity, independence,
and, in a word, elevation of character, constituted the Roman
ideal of perfection, it will appear evident that this was preeminently
the type of freemen, and that the condition of
slavery was in the very highest degree unfavourable to its
development. Christianity for the first time gave the servile
virtues the foremost place in the moral type. Humility,
obedience, gentleness, patience, resignation, are all cardinal
or rudimentary virtues in the Christian character; they were
all neglected or underrated by the Pagans; they can all expand
and flourish in a servile position.
</p>

<p>
The influence of Christianity upon slavery, by inclining the
moral type to the servile classes, though less obvious and less
discussed than some others, is, I believe, in the very highest degree
important. There is, probably, scarcely any other single
circumstance that exercises so profound an influence upon
the social and political relations of a religion, as the class
type with which it can most readily assimilate; or, in other
words, the group or variety of virtues to which it gives the
foremost place. The virtues that are most suited to the
servile position were in general so little honoured by antiquity
that they were not even cultivated in their appropriate
sphere. The aspirations of good men were in a different
direction. The virtue of the Stoic, which rose triumphantly
under adversity, nearly always withered under degradation.
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
For the first time, under the influence of Christianity, a great
moral movement passed through the servile class. The multitude
of slaves who embraced the new faith was one of the
reproaches of the Pagans; and the names of Blandina, Potamiæna,
Eutyches, Victorinus, and Nereus, show how fully
they shared in the sufferings and in the glory of martyrdom <note place='foot'>See a most admirable dissertation
on this subject in Le Blant,
<hi rend='italic'>Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule</hi>,
tome ii. pp. 284-299; Gibbon's
<hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>, ch. xxxviii.</note>.
The first and grandest edifice of Byzantine architecture
in Italy&mdash;the noble church of St. Vital, at Ravenna&mdash;was
dedicated by Justinian to the memory of a martyred
slave.
</p>

<p>
While Christianity thus broke down the contempt with
which the master had regarded his slaves, and planted among
the latter a principle of moral regeneration which expanded
in no other sphere with an equal perfection, its action in
procuring the freedom of the slave was unceasing. The law
of Constantine, which placed the ceremony under the superintendence
of the clergy, and the many laws that gave special
facilities of manumission to those who desired to enter
the monasteries or the priesthood, symbolised the religious
character the act had assumed. It was celebrated on Church
festivals, especially at Easter; and, although it was not proclaimed
a matter of duty or necessity, it was always regarded
as one of the most acceptable modes of expiating past sins.
St. Melania was said to have emancipated 8,000 slaves; St.
Ovidius, a rich martyr of Gaul, 5,000; Chromatius, a Roman
prefect under Diocletian, 1,400; Hermes, a prefect in the
reign of Trajan, 1,250.<note place='foot'>Champagny, <hi rend='italic'>Charité chrétienne</hi>,
p. 210. These numbers are, no doubt,
exaggerated; see Wallon, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de
l'Esclavage</hi>, tome iii. p. 38.</note> Pope St. Gregory, many of the
clergy at Hippo under the rule of St. Augustine, as well
as great numbers of private individuals, freed their slaves as
an act of piety.<note place='foot'>See Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>La Société civile
dans le Monde romain</hi>, pp. 246-248.</note> It became customary to do so on occasions
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
of national or personal thanksgiving, on recovery from sickness,
on the birth of a child, at the hour of death, and, above
all, in testamentary bequests.<note place='foot'>Muratori has devoted two valuable
dissertations (<hi rend='italic'>Antich. Ital.</hi>
xiv. xv.) to mediæval slavery.</note> Numerous charters and epitaphs
still record the gift of liberty to slaves throughout the
middle ages, <q>for the benefit of the soul</q> of the donor or
testator. In the thirteenth century, when there were no
slaves to emancipate in France, it was usual in many churches
to release caged pigeons on the ecclesiastical festivals, in
memory of the ancient charity, and that prisoners might still
be freed in the name of Christ.<note place='foot'>Ozanam's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Civilisation
in the Fifth Century</hi> (Eng. trans.),
vol. ii. p. 43. St. Adelbert, Archbishop
of Prague at the end of the
tenth century, was especially famous
for his opposition to the slave trade.
In Sweden, the abolition of slavery
in the thirteenth century was avowedly
accomplished in obedience to
Christian principles. (Moehler, <hi rend='italic'>Le
Christianisme et l'Esclavage</hi>, pp.
194-196; Ryan's <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Effects of Religion upon Mankind</hi>,
pp. 142, 143.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Slavery, however, lasted in Europe for about 800 years
after Constantine, and during the period with which alone
this volume is concerned, although its character was changed
and mitigated, the number of men who were subject to it
was probably greater than in the Pagan Empire. In the
West the barbarian conquests modified the conditions of
labour in two directions. The cessation of the stream of barbarian
captives, the impoverishment of great families, who
had been surrounded by vast retinues of slaves, the general
diminution of town life, and the barbarian habits of personal
independence, checked the old form of slavery, while
the misery and the precarious condition of the free peasants
induced them in great numbers to barter their liberty for
protection by the neighbouring lord.<note place='foot'>Salvian, in a famous passage
(<hi rend='italic'>De Gubernatione Dei</hi>, lib. v.), notices
the multitudes of poor who
voluntarily became <q>coloni</q> for the
sake of protection and a livelihood.
The coloni, who were attached to
the soil, were much the same as the
mediæval serfs. We have already
noticed them coming into being, apparently
when the Roman emperors
settled barbarian prisoners to cultivate the desert lands of Italy;
and before the barbarian invasions
their numbers seem to have much
increased. M. Guizot has devoted
two chapters to this subject. (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
de la Civilisation en France</hi>, vii.
viii.)</note> In the East, the destruction
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
of great fortunes through excessive taxation diminished
the number of superfluous slaves; and the fiscal system
of the Byzantine Empire, by which agricultural slaves were
taxed according to their employments,<note place='foot'>See Finlay's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Greece</hi>,
vol. i. p. 241.</note> as well as the desire
of emperors to encourage agriculture, led the legislators to
attach the slaves permanently to the soil. In the course of
time, almost the entire free peasantry, and the greater number
of the old slaves, had sunk or risen into the qualified
slavery called serfdom, which formed the basis of the great
edifice of feudalism. Towards the end of the eighth century,
the sale of slaves beyond their native provinces was in most
countries prohibited.<note place='foot'>Moehler, p. 181.</note> The creation of the free cities of Italy,
the custom of emancipating slaves who were enrolled in the
army, and economical changes which made free labour more
profitable than slave labour, conspired with religious motives
in effecting the ultimate freedom of labour. The practice of
manumitting, as an act of devotion, continued to the end;
but the ecclesiastics, probably through the feeling that they
had no right to alienate corporate property, in which they had
only a life interest, were among the last to follow the counsels
they so liberally bestowed upon the laity.<note place='foot'><q>Non v'era anticamente signor
secolare, vescovo, abbate, capitolo
di canonici e monistero che non
avesse al suo servigio molti servi.
Molto frequentemente solevano i
secolari manometterli. Non cosi
le chiese, e i monisteri, non per
altra cagione, a mio credere, se non
perchè la manumissione è una spezie
di alienazione, ed era dai canoni proibito
l'alienare i beni delle chiese.</q>&mdash;Muratori,
<hi rend='italic'>Dissert.</hi> xv. Some
Councils, however, recognised the
right of bishops to emancipate
Church slaves. Moehler, <hi rend='italic'>Le Christianisme
et l'Esclavage</hi>, p. 187.
Many peasants placed themselves
under the dominion of the monks,
as being the best masters, and also
to obtain the benefit of their prayers.</note> In the twelfth
century, however, slaves in Europe were very rare. In the
fourteenth century, slavery was almost unknown.<note place='foot'>Muratori; Hallam's <hi rend='italic'>Middle
Ages</hi>, ch. ii. part ii.</note>
</p>

<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>

<p>
Closely connected with the influence of the Church in destroying
hereditary slavery, was its influence in redeeming
captives from servitude. In no other form of charity was its
beneficial character more continually and more splendidly
displayed. During the long and dreary trials of the barbarian
invasions, when the whole structure of society was dislocated,
when vast districts and mighty cities were in a few
months almost depopulated, and when the flower of the youth
of Italy were mown down by the sword, or carried away
into captivity, the bishops never desisted from their efforts to
alleviate the sufferings of the prisoners. St. Ambrose, disregarding
the outcries of the Arians, who denounced his act as
atrocious sacrilege, sold the rich church ornaments of Milan
to rescue some captives who had fallen into the hands of the
Goths, and this practice&mdash;which was afterwards formally
sanctioned by St. Gregory the Great&mdash;became speedily general.
When the Roman army had captured, but refused to support,
seven thousand Persian prisoners, Acacius, Bishop of Amida,
undeterred by the bitter hostility of the Persians to Christianity,
and declaring that <q>God had no need of plates or
dishes,</q> sold all the rich church ornaments of his diocese,
rescued the unbelieving prisoners, and sent them back unharmed
to their king. During the horrors of the Vandal
invasion, Deogratias, Bishop of Carthage, took a similar step
to ransom the Roman prisoners. St. Augustine, St. Gregory
the Great, St. Cæsarius of Arles, St. Exuperius of Toulouse,
St. Hilary, St. Remi, all melted down or sold their church
vases to free prisoners. St. Cyprian sent a large sum for the
same purpose to the Bishop of Nicomedia. St. Epiphanius
and St. Avitus, in conjunction with a rich Gaulish lady
named Syagria, are said to have rescued thousands. St.
Eligius devoted to this object his entire fortune. St. Paulinus
of Nola displayed a similar generosity, and the legends even
assert, though untruly, that he, like St. Peter Teleonarius
and St. Serapion, having exhausted all other forms of charity,
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
as a last gift sold himself to slavery. When, long afterwards,
the Mohammedan conquests in a measure reproduced
the calamities of the barbarian invasions, the same unwearied
charity was displayed. The Trinitarian monks, founded by John
of Matha in the twelfth century, were devoted to the release
of Christian captives, and another society was founded with
the same object by Peter Nolasco, in the following century.<note place='foot'>See on this subject, Ryan, pp.
151-152; Cibrario, <hi rend='italic'>Economica politica
del Medio Evo</hi>, lib. iii. cap. ii.,
and especially Le Blant, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptions
chrétiennes de la Gaule</hi>, tome
ii. pp. 284-299.</note>
</p>

<p>
The different branches of the subject I am examining are
so closely intertwined that it is difficult to investigate one
without in a measure anticipating the others. While discussing
the influence of the Church in protecting infancy, in
raising the estimate of human life, and in alleviating slavery,
I have trenched largely upon the last application of the
doctrine of Christian fraternity I must examine&mdash;I mean the
foundation of charity. The difference between Pagan and
Christian societies in this matter is very profound; but a
great part of it must be ascribed to causes other than
religious opinions. Charity finds an extended scope for
action only, where there exists a large class of men at once
independent and impoverished. In the ancient societies,
slavery in a great measure replaced pauperism, and, by
securing the subsistence of a very large proportion of the
poor, contracted the sphere of charity. And what slavery
did at Rome for the very poor, the system of clientage did
for those of a somewhat higher rank. The existence of these
two institutions is sufficient to show the injustice of judging
the two societies by a mere comparison of their charitable
institutions, and we must also remember that among the
ancients the relief of the indigent was one of the most important
functions of the State. Not to dwell upon the many
measures taken with this object in ancient Greece, in considering
the condition of the Roman poor we are at once met
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
by the simple fact that for several centuries the immense
majority of these were habitually supported by gratuitous
distributions of corn. In a very early period of Roman
history we find occasional instances of distribution; but it
was not till <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi> 630 that Caius Gracchus caused a law to
be made, supplying the poorer classes with corn at a price
that was little more than nominal; and although, two years
after, the nobles succeeded in revoking this law, it was after
several fluctuations finally re-enacted in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi> 679. The
Cassia-Terentia law, as it was called from the consuls under
whom it was at last established, was largely extended in its
operation, or, as some think, revived from neglect in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.u.c.</hi>
691, by Cato of Utica, who desired by this means to divert
popularity from the cause of Cæsar, under whom multitudes
of the poor were enrolling themselves. Four years later,
Clodius Pulcher, abolishing the small payment which had
been demanded, made the distribution entirely gratuitous.
It took place once a month, and consisted of five modii<note place='foot'>About 5/6ths of a bushel. See Hume's <hi rend='italic'>Essay on the Populousness
of Ancient Nations</hi>.</note> a
head. In the time of Julius Cæsar no less than 320,000
persons were inscribed as recipients; but Cæsar reduced the
number by one half. Under Augustus it had risen to
200,000. This emperor desired to restrict the distribution
of corn to three or four times a year, but, yielding to the
popular wish, he at last consented that it should continue
monthly. It soon became the leading fact of Roman life.
Numerous officers were appointed to provide it. A severe
legislation controlled their acts, and to secure a regular and
abundant supply of corn for the capital became the principal
object of the provincial governors. Under the Antonines the
number of the recipients had considerably increased, having
sometimes, it is said, exceeded 500,000. Septimus Severus
added to the corn a ration of oil. Aurelian replaced the
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
monthly distribution of unground corn by a daily distribution
of bread, and added, moreover, a portion of pork. Gratuitous
distributions were afterwards extended to Constantinople,
Alexandria, and Antioch, and were probably not altogether
unknown in smaller towns.<note place='foot'>The history of these distributions
is traced with admirable learning
by M. Naudet in his <hi rend='italic'>Mémoire
sur les Secours publics dans l'Antiquité</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Mém. de l'Académie des Inscrip.
et Belles-lettres</hi>, tome xiii.),
an essay to which I am much indebted.
See, too, Monnier, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
de l'Assistance publique</hi>; B. Dumas,
<hi rend='italic'>Des Secours publics chez les Anciens</hi>;
and Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur la Société
civile dans le Monde romain et sur
sa Transformation par le Christianisme</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that this gratuitous distribution of
corn ranked, with the institution of slavery and the gladiatorial
exhibitions, as one of the chief demoralising influences
of the Empire. The most injudicious charity, however pernicious
to the classes it is intended to relieve, has commonly
a beneficial and softening influence upon the donor, and
through him upon society at large. But the Roman distribution
of corn, being merely a political device, had no
humanising influence upon the people, while, being regulated
only by the indigence, and not at all by the infirmities or
character, of the recipient, it was a direct and overwhelming
encouragement to idleness. With a provision of the necessaries
of life, and with an abundant supply of amusements, the
poor Romans readily gave up honourable labour, all trades
in the city languished, every interruption in the distribution
of corn was followed by fearful sufferings, free gifts of land
were often insufficient to attract the citizens to honest labour,
and the multiplication of children, which rendered the public
relief inadequate, was checked by abortion, exposition, or
infanticide.
</p>

<p>
When we remember that the population of Rome
probably never exceeded a million and a half, that a large
proportion of the indigent were provided for as slaves, and
that more than 200,000 freemen were habitually supplied
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
with the first necessary of life, we cannot, I think, charge
the Pagan society of the metropolis, at least, with an excessive
parsimony in relieving poverty. But besides the distribution
of corn, several other measures were taken. Salt, which
was very largely used by the Roman poor, had during the
Republic been made a monopoly of the State, and was sold
by it at a price that was little more than nominal.<note place='foot'>Livy, ii. 9; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi>
xxxi. 41.</note> The distribution
of land, which was the subject of the agrarian laws,
was, under a new form, practised by Julius Cæsar,<note place='foot'>Dion Cassius, xxxviii. 1-7.</note> Nerva,<note place='foot'>Xiphilin, lxviii. 2; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
vii. 31.</note>
and Septimus Severus,<note place='foot'>Spartian. <hi rend='italic'>Sept. Severus</hi>.</note> who bought land to divide it among
the poor citizens. Large legacies were left to the people by
Julius Cæsar, Augustus, and others, and considerable, though
irregular, donations made on occasions of great rejoicings.
Numerous public baths were established, to which, when
they were not absolutely gratuitous, the smallest coin in use
gave admission, and which were in consequence habitually
employed by the poor. Vespasian instituted, and the Antonines
extended, a system of popular education, and the movement
I have already noticed, for the support of the children
of poor parents, acquired very considerable proportions. The
first trace of it at Rome may be found under Augustus, who
gave money and corn for the support of young children, who
had previously not been included in the public distributions.<note place='foot'>Suet. <hi rend='italic'>August.</hi> 41; Dion Cassius,
li, 1.</note>
This appears, however, to have been but an act of isolated
benevolence, and the honour of first instituting a systematic
effort in this direction belongs to Nerva, who enjoined the
support of poor children, not only in Rome, but in all the
cities of Italy.<note place='foot'><q>Afflictos civitatis relevavit;
puellas puerosque natos parentibus
egestosis sumptu publico per Italiæ
oppida ali jussit.</q>&mdash;Sext. Aurelius
Victor, <hi rend='italic'>Epitome</hi>, <q>Nerva.</q> This
measure of Nerva, though not mentioned
by any other writer, is confirmed
by the evidence of medals.
(Naudet, p. 75.)</note> Trajan greatly extended the system. In
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
his reign 5,000 poor children were supported by the Government
in Rome alone,<note place='foot'>Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Panegyr.</hi> xxvi. xxviii.</note> and similar measures, though we know
not on what scale, were taken in the other Italian and even
African cities. At the little town of Velleia, we find a
charity instituted by Trajan, for the partial support of 270
children.<note place='foot'>We know of this charity
from an extant bronze tablet. See
Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Essai historique sur la
Société romaine</hi>, p. 428.</note> Private benevolence followed in the same direction,
and several inscriptions which still remain, though they
do not enable us to write its history, sufficiently attest its
activity. The younger Pliny, besides warmly encouraging
schools, devoted a small property to the support of poor
children in his native city of Como.<note place='foot'>Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> i. 8; iv. 13.</note> The name of Cælia
Macrina is preserved as the foundress of a charity for 100
children at Terracina.<note place='foot'>Schmidt, p. 428.</note> Hadrian increased the supplies of
corn allotted to these charities, and he was also distinguished
for his bounty to poor women.<note place='foot'>Spartianus, <hi rend='italic'>Hadrian</hi>.</note> Antoninus was accustomed
to lend money to the poor at four per cent., which was much
below the normal rate of interest,<note place='foot'>Capitolinus, <hi rend='italic'>Antoninus</hi>.</note> and both he and Marcus
Aurelius dedicated to the memory of their wives institutions
for the support of girls.<note place='foot'>Capitolinus, <hi rend='italic'>Anton.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Marc.
Aurel.</hi></note> Alexander Severus in like manner
dedicated an institution for the support of children to the
memory of his mother.<note place='foot'>Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>A. Severus</hi>.</note> Public hospitals were probably
unknown in Europe before Christianity; but there are traces
of the distribution of medicine to the sick poor;<note place='foot'>See Friedlænder, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des
Mœurs romaines</hi>, iii. p. 157.</note> there were
private infirmaries for slaves, and also, it is believed, military
hospitals.<note place='foot'>Seneca (<hi rend='italic'>De Ira</hi>, lib. i. cap. 16)
speaks of institutions called valetudinaria,
which most writers think
were private infirmaries in rich
men's houses. The opinion that
the Romans had public hospitals
is maintained in a very learned
and valuable, but little-known
work, called <hi rend='italic'>Collections relative to
the Systematic Relief of the Poor</hi>.
(London, 1815.)</note> Provincial towns were occasionally assisted by
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
the Government in seasons of great distress, and there are
some recorded instances of private legacies for their benefit.<note place='foot'>See Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> xii. 58;
Pliny, v. 7; x. 79.</note>
</p>

<p>
These various measures are by no means inconsiderable,
and it is not unreasonable to suppose that many similar steps
were taken, of which all record has been lost. The history
of charity presents so few salient features, so little that can
strike the imagination or arrest the attention, that it is
usually almost wholly neglected by historians; and it is
easy to conceive what inadequate notions of our existing
charities could be gleaned from the casual allusions in plays
or poems, in political histories or court memoirs. There can,
however, be no question that neither in practice nor in
theory, neither in the institutions that were founded nor in
the place that was assigned to it in the scale of duties, did
charity in antiquity occupy a position at all comparable to
that which it has obtained by Christianity. Nearly all
relief was a State measure, dictated much more by policy
than by benevolence; and the habit of selling young children,
the innumerable expositions, the readiness of the poor to
enrol themselves as gladiators, and the frequent famines,
show how large was the measure of unrelieved distress. A
very few Pagan examples of charity have, indeed, descended
to us. Among the Greeks we find Epaminondas ransoming
captives, and collecting dowers for poor girls;<note place='foot'>Cornelius Nepos, <hi rend='italic'>Epaminondas</hi>,
cap. iii.</note> Cimon,
feeding the hungry and clothing the naked;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Cimon</hi>.</note> Bias, purchasing,
emancipating, and furnishing with dowers some captive girls
of Messina.<note place='foot'>Diog. Laërt. <hi rend='italic'>Bias</hi>.</note> Tacitus has described with enthusiasm how,
after a catastrophe near Rome, the rich threw open their
houses and taxed all their resources to relieve the sufferers.<note place='foot'>Tac. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> iv. 63.</note>
There existed, too, among the poor, both of Greece and
Rome, mutual insurance societies, which undertook to provide
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
for their sick and infirm members.<note place='foot'>See Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> x. 94, and the remarks of Naudet, pp. 38, 39.</note> The very frequent
reference to mendicancy in the Latin writers shows that
beggars, and therefore those who relieved beggars, were
numerous. The duty of hospitality was also strongly enjoined,
and was placed under the special protection of the
supreme Deity. But the active, habitual, and detailed
charity of private persons, which is so conspicuous a feature
in all Christian societies, was scarcely known in antiquity,
and there are not more than two or three moralists who
have even noticed it. Of these, the chief rank belongs to
Cicero, who devoted two very judicious but somewhat cold
chapters to the subject. Nothing, he said, is more suitable
to the nature of man than beneficence or liberality, but there
are many cautions to be urged in practising it. We must
take care that our bounty is a real blessing to the person we
relieve; that it does not exceed our own means; that it is
not, as was the case with Sylla and Cæsar, derived from the
spoliation of others; that it springs from the heart and not
from ostentation; that the claims of gratitude are preferred
to the mere impulses of compassion, and that due regard is
paid both to the character and to the wants of the recipient.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Offic.</hi> i. 14, 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Christianity for the first time made charity a rudimentary
virtue, giving it a leading place in the moral type, and in the
exhortations of its teachers. Besides its general influence in
stimulating the affections, it effected a complete revolution
in this sphere, by regarding the poor as the special representatives
of the Christian Founder, and thus making the
love of Christ, rather than the love of man, the principle of
charity. Even in the days of persecution, collections for the
relief of the poor were made at the Sunday meetings.
The agapæ or feasts of love were intended mainly for the
poor, and food that was saved by the fasts was devoted to
their benefit. A vast organisation of charity, presided over
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
by the bishops, and actively directed by the deacons, soon
ramified over Christendom, till the bond of charity became
the bond of unity, and the most distant sections of the
Christian Church corresponded by the interchange of mercy.
Long before the era of Constantine, it was observed that the
charities of the Christians were so extensive&mdash;it may, perhaps,
be said so excessive&mdash;that they drew very many
impostors to the Church;<note place='foot'>Lucian describes this in his
famous picture of Peregrinus; and
Julian, much later, accused the
Christians of drawing men into
the Church by their charities.
Socrates (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccl.</hi> vii. 17) tells
a story of a Jew who, pretending
to be a convert to Christianity,
had been often baptised in different
sects, and had amassed a considerable
fortune by the gifts he
received on those occasions. He
was at last miraculously detected
by the Novatian bishop Paul.
There are several instances in the
<hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi> of judgments
falling on those who duped benevolent
Christians.</note> and when the victory of Christianity
was achieved, the enthusiasm for charity displayed
itself in the erection of numerous institutions that were altogether
unknown to the Pagan world. A Roman lady,
named Fabiola, in the fourth century, founded at Rome, as
an act of penance, the first public hospital, and the charity
planted by that woman's hand overspread the world, and
will alleviate, to the end of time, the darkest anguish of
humanity. Another hospital was soon after founded by St.
Pammachus; another of great celebrity by St. Basil, at
Cæsarea. St. Basil also erected at Cæsarea what was probably
the first asylum for lepers. Xenodochia, or refuges for
strangers, speedily rose, especially along the paths of the
pilgrims. St. Pammachus founded one at Ostia; Paula and
Melania founded others at Jerusalem. The Council of Nice
ordered that one should be erected in every city. In the
time of St. Chrysostom the church of Antioch supported
3,000 widows and virgins, besides strangers and sick. Legacies
for the poor became common; and it was not unfrequent
for men and women who desired to live a life of peculiar
sanctity, and especially for priests who attained the episcopacy
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
to bestow their entire properties in charity. Even the early
Oriental monks, who for the most part were extremely
removed from the active and social virtues, supplied many
noble examples of charity. St. Ephrem, in a time of pestilence,
emerged from his solitude to found and superintend a
hospital at Edessa. A monk named Thalasius collected
blind beggars in an asylum on the banks of the Euphrates.
A merchant named Apollonius founded on Mount Nitria a
gratuitous dispensary for the monks. The monks often
assisted by their labours provinces that were suffering from
pestilence or famine. We may trace the remains of the
pure socialism that marked the first phase of the Christian
community, in the emphatic language with which some of
the Fathers proclaimed charity to be a matter not of mercy but
of justice, maintaining that all property is based on usurpation,
that the earth by right is common to all men, and
that no man can claim a superabundant supply of its goods
except as an administrator for others. A Christian, it was
maintained, should devote at least one-tenth of his profits to
the poor.<note place='foot'>See on this subject Chastel,
<hi rend='italic'>Études historiques sur la Charité</hi>
(Paris, 1853); Martin Doisy, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
de la Charité pendant les quatre
premiers Siècles</hi> (Paris, 1848);
Champagny, <hi rend='italic'>Charité chrétienne</hi>;
Tollemer, <hi rend='italic'>Origines de la Charité
catholique</hi> (Paris, 1863); Ryan,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Effects of Religion
upon Mankind</hi> (Dublin, 1820);
and the works of Bingham and of
Cave. I am also indebted, in this
part of my subject, to Dean Milman's
histories, Neander's <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiastical
History</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Private Life of the
Early Christians</hi>, and to Migne's
<hi rend='italic'>Encyclopédie</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The enthusiasm of charity, thus manifested in the Church,
speedily attracted the attention of the Pagans. The ridicule
of Lucian, and the vain efforts of Julian to produce a rival
system of charity within the limits of Paganism,<note place='foot'>See the famous epistle of
Julian to Arsacius, where he
declares that it is shameful that
<q>the Galileans</q> should support
not only their own, but also the
heathen poor; and also the comments
of Sozomen, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. eccl.</hi> v.
16.</note> emphatically
attested both its pre-eminence and its catholicity. During
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
the pestilences that desolated Carthage in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 326, and
Alexandria in the reigns of Gallienus and of Maximian, while
the Pagans fled panic-stricken from the contagion, the
Christians extorted the admiration of their fellow-countrymen
by the courage with which they rallied around their bishops,
consoled the last hours of the sufferers, and buried the abandoned
dead.<note place='foot'>The conduct of the Christians,
on the first of these occasions, is
described by Pontius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Cypriani</hi>,
ix. 19. St. Cyprian organised
their efforts. On the Alexandrian
famines and pestilences, see Eusebius,
<hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> vii. 22; ix. 8.</note> In the rapid increase of pauperism arising
from the emancipation of numerous slaves, their charity
found free scope for action, and its resources were soon taxed
to the utmost by the horrors of the barbarian invasions.
The conquest of Africa by Genseric deprived Italy of the
supply of corn upon which it almost wholly depended,
arrested the gratuitous distribution by which the Roman
poor were mainly supported, and produced all over the land
the most appalling calamities.<note place='foot'>The effects of this conquest
have been well described by Sismondi,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Chute de l'Empire
Romain</hi>, tome i. pp. 258-260.
Theodoric afterwards made some
efforts to re-establish the distribution,
but it never regained its
former proportions. The pictures
of the starvation and depopulation
of Italy at this time are appalling.
Some fearful facts on the subject
are collected by Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline
and Fall</hi>, ch. xxxvi.; Chateaubriand,
vi<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Disc.</hi> 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>de</hi> partie.</note> The history of Italy became
one monotonous tale of famine and pestilence, of starving
populations and ruined cities. But everywhere amid this
chaos of dissolution we may detect the majestic form of the
Christian priest mediating between the hostile forces, straining
every nerve to lighten the calamities around him. When
the Imperial city was captured and plundered by the hosts
of Alaric, a Christian church remained a secure sanctuary,
which neither the passions nor the avarice of the Goths
transgressed. When a fiercer than Alaric had marked out
Rome for his prey, the Pope St. Leo, arrayed in his sacerdotal
robes, confronted the victorious Hun, as the ambassador
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
of his fellow-countrymen, and Attila, overpowered by
religious awe, turned aside in his course. When, two years
later, Rome lay at the mercy of Genseric, the same Pope
interposed with the Vandal conqueror, and obtained from
him a partial cessation of the massacre. The Archdeacon
Pelagius interceded with similar humanity and similar
success, when Rome had been captured by Totila. In Gaul,
Troyes is said to have been saved from destruction by the
influence of St. Lupus, and Orleans by the influence of St.
Agnan. In Britain an invasion of the Picts was averted by
St. Germain of Auxerre. The relations of rulers to their
subjects, and of tribunals to the poor, were modified by the
same intervention. When Antioch was threatened with
destruction on account of its rebellion against Theodosius,
the anchorites poured forth from the neighbouring deserts to
intercede with the ministers of the emperor, while the Archbishop
Flavian went himself as a suppliant to Constantinople.
St. Ambrose imposed public penance on Theodosius, on
account of the massacre of Thessalonica. Synesius excommunicated
for his oppressions a governor named Andronicus;
and two French Councils, in the sixth century, imposed the
same penalty on all great men who arbitrarily ejected the
poor. Special laws were found necessary to restrain the
turbulent charity of some priests and monks, who impeded
the course of justice, and even snatched criminals from the
hands of the law.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> ix. xl. 15-16.
The first of these laws was made
by Theodosius, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 392; the second
by Honorius, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 398.</note> St. Abraham, St. Epiphanius, and St.
Basil are all said to have obtained the remission or reduction
of oppressive imposts. To provide for the interests of widows
and orphans was part of the official ecclesiastical duty, and
a Council of Macon anathematised any ruler who brought
them to trial without first apprising the bishop of the diocese.
A Council of Toledo, in the fifth century, threatened with
excommunication all who robbed priests, monks, or poor
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
men, or refused to listen to their expostulations. One of the
chief causes of the inordinate power acquired by the clergy
was their mediatorial office, and their gigantic wealth was
in a great degree due to the legacies of those who regarded
them as the trustees of the poor. As time rolled on, charity
assumed many forms, and every monastery became a centre
from which it radiated. By the monks the nobles were
overawed, the poor protected, the sick tended, travellers
sheltered, prisoners ransomed, the remotest spheres of suffering
explored. During the darkest period of the middle ages,
monks founded a refuge for pilgrims amid the horrors of the
Alpine snows. A solitary hermit often planted himself,
with his little boat, by a bridgeless stream, and the charity
of his life was to ferry over the traveller.<note place='foot'>Cibrario, <hi rend='italic'>Economica politica
del Medio Evo</hi>, lib. ii. cap. iii.
The most remarkable of these
saints was St. Julien l'Hospitalier,
who having under a mistake killed
his father and mother, as a penance
became a ferryman of a great
river, and having embarked on a
very stormy and dangerous night
at the voice of a traveller in distress,
received Christ into his boat.
His story is painted on a window
of the thirteenth century, in Rouen
Cathedral. See Langlois, <hi rend='italic'>Essai
historique sur la Peinture sur verre</hi>,
pp. 32-37.</note> When the
hideous disease of leprosy extended its ravages over Europe,
when the minds of men were filled with terror, not only by
its loathsomeness and its contagion, but also by the notion
that it was in a peculiar sense supernatural,<note place='foot'>The fact of leprosy being
taken as the image of sin gave rise
to some curious notions of its
supernatural character, and to
many legends of saints curing
leprosy by baptism. See Maury,
<hi rend='italic'>Légendes pieuses du Moyen-Age</hi>,
pp. 64-65.</note> new hospitals
and refuges overspread Europe, and monks flocked in multitudes
to serve in them.<note place='foot'>See on these hospitals Cibrario,
<hi rend='italic'>Econ. Politica del Medio Evo</hi>, lib.
iii. cap. ii.</note> Sometimes, the legends say, the
leper's form was in a moment transfigured, and he who
came to tend the most loathsome of mankind received his
reward, for he found himself in the presence of his Lord.
</p>

<p>
There is no fact of which an historian becomes more
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
speedily or more painfully conscious than the great difference
between the importance and the dramatic interest of the
subjects he treats. Wars or massacres, the horrors of
martyrdom or the splendours of individual prowess, are
susceptible of such brilliant colouring, that with but little
literary skill they can be so pourtrayed that their importance
is adequately realised, and they appeal powerfully to the
emotions of the reader. But this vast and unostentatious
movement of charity, operating in the village hamlet and in
the lonely hospital, staunching the widow's tears, and following
all the windings of the poor man's griefs, presents few
features the imagination can grasp, and leaves no deep impression
upon the mind. The greatest things are often those
which are most imperfectly realised; and surely no achievements
of the Christian Church are more truly great than
those which it has effected in the sphere of charity. For
the first time in the history of mankind, it has inspired
many thousands of men and women, at the sacrifice of all
worldly interests, and often under circumstances of extreme
discomfort or danger, to devote their entire lives to the
single object of assuaging the sufferings of humanity. It has
covered the globe with countless institutions of mercy,
absolutely unknown to the whole Pagan world. It has
indissolubly united, in the minds of men, the idea of supreme
goodness with that of active and constant benevolence. It
has placed in every parish a religious minister, who, whatever
may be his other functions, has at least been officially charged
with the superintendence of an organisation of charity, and
who finds in this office one of the most important as well as
one of the most legitimate sources of his power.
</p>

<p>
There are, however, two important qualifications to the
admiration with which we regard the history of Christian
charity&mdash;one relating to a particular form of suffering, and
the other of a more general kind. A strong, ill-defined
notion of the supernatural character of insanity had existed
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
from the earliest times; but there were special circumstances
which rendered the action of the Church peculiarly unfavourable
to those who were either predisposed to or afflicted with
this calamity. The reality both of witchcraft and diabolical
possession had been distinctly recognised in the Jewish
writings. The received opinions about eternal torture, and
ever-present dæmons, and the continued strain upon the
imagination, in dwelling upon an unseen world, were pre-eminently
fitted to produce madness in those who were at all
predisposed to it, and, where insanity had actually appeared,
to determine the form and complexion of the hallucinations
of the maniac.<note place='foot'>Calmeil observes: <q>On a souvent
constaté depuis un demi-siècle
que la folie est sujette à prendre
la teinte des croyances religieuses,
des idées philosophiques ou superstitieuses,
des préjugés sociaux qui
ont cours, qui sont actuellement
en vogue parmi les peuples ou les
nations; que cette teinte varie
dans un même pays suivant le
caractère des événements relatifs à
la politique extérieure, le caractère
des événements civils, la nature
des productions littéraires, des
représentations théâtrales, suivant
la tournure, la direction, le genre
d'élan qu'y prennent l'industrie, les
arts et les sciences.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De la Folie</hi>,
tome i. pp. 122-123.</note> Theology supplying all the images that
acted most powerfully upon the imagination, most madness,
for many centuries, took a theological cast. One important
department of it appears chiefly in the lives of the saints.
Men of lively imaginations and absolute ignorance, living
apart from all their fellows, amid the horrors of a savage
wilderness, practising austerities by which their physical
system was thoroughly deranged, and firmly persuaded that
innumerable devils were continually hovering about their
cells and interfering with their devotions, speedily and very
naturally became subject to constant hallucinations, which
probably form the nucleus of truth in the legends of their
lives. But it was impossible that insanity should confine
itself to the orthodox forms of celestial visions, or of the
apparitions and the defeats of devils. Very frequently it
led the unhappy maniac to some delusion, which called down
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
upon him the speedy sentence of the Church. Thus, in the
year 1300, the corpse of a Bohemian or, according to another
version, an English girl who imagined herself to be the Holy
Ghost incarnate for the redemption of women, was dug up
and burnt, and two women who believed in her perished at
the stake.<note place='foot'><p>Milman's <hi rend='italic'>History of Latin
Christianity</hi>, vol. vii. pp. 353, 354.
</p>
<p>
<q>Venit de Anglia virgo decora
valde, pariterque facunda, dicens,
Spiritum Sanctum incarnatum in
redemptionem mulierum, et baptizavit
mulieres in nomine Patris,
Filii et sui. Quæ mortua ducta
fuit in Mediolanum, ibi et cremata.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Annales
Dominicanorum Colmariensium</hi>
(in the <q>Rerum Germanic.
Scriptores</q>).</p></note> In the year 1359, a Spaniard declared himself to
be the brother of the archangel Michael, and to be destined
for the place in heaven which Satan had lost; and he added
that he was accustomed every day both to mount into heaven
and descend into hell, that the end of the world was at hand,
and that it was reserved for him to enter into single combat
with Antichrist. The poor lunatic fell into the hands of the
Archbishop of Toledo, and was burnt alive.<note place='foot'><q>Martin Gonçalez, du diocèse
de Cuenca, disoit qu'il etoit frère
de l'archange S. Michel, la première
vérité et l'échelle du ciel; que
c'étoit pour lui que Dieu réservoit
la place que Lucifer avoit perdue;
que tous les jours il s'élevoit au
plus haut de l'Empirée et descendoit
ensuite au plus profond des
enfers; qu'a la fin du monde, qui
étoit proche, il iroit au devant de
l'Antichrist et qu'il le terrasseroit,
ayant á sa main la croix de Jésus-Christ
et sa couronne d'épines.
L'archevêque de Tolède, n'ayant
pu convertir ce fanatique obstiné,
ni l'empêcher de dogmatiser, l'avoit
enfin livré au bras séculier.</q>&mdash;Touron,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Hommes illustres
de l'ordre de St. Dominique</hi>, Paris,
1745 (<hi rend='italic'>Vie d'Eyméricus</hi>), tome ii.
p. 635.</note> In some cases
the hallucination took the form of an irregular inspiration.
On this charge, Joan of Arc, and another girl who had been
fired by her example, and had endeavoured, apparently under
a genuine hallucination, to follow her career,<note place='foot'>Calmeil, <hi rend='italic'>De la Folie</hi>, tome i.
p. 134.</note> were burnt
alive. A famous Spanish physician and scholar, named
Torralba, who lived in the sixteenth century, and who
imagined that he had an attendant angel continually about
him, escaped with public penance and confession;<note place='foot'>Ibid. tome i. pp. 242-247.</note> but a
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
professor of theology in Lima, who laboured under the same
delusion, and added to it some wild notions about his spiritual
dignities, was less fortunate. He was burnt by the Inquisition
of Peru.<note place='foot'>Calmeil, tome i. p. 247.</note> Most commonly, however, the theological
notions about witchcraft either produced madness or determined
its form, and, through the influence of the clergy of
the different sections of the Christian Church, many thousands
of unhappy women, who, from their age, their loneliness, and
their infirmity, were most deserving of pity, were devoted to
the hatred of mankind, and, having been tortured with
horrible and ingenious cruelty, were at last burnt alive.
</p>

<p>
The existence, however, of some forms of natural madness
was generally admitted; but the measures for the relief of
the unhappy victims were very few, and very ill judged.
Among the ancients, they were brought to the temples, and
subjected to imposing ceremonies, which were believed
supernaturally to relieve them, and which probably had a
favourable influence through their action upon the imagination.
The great Greek physicians had devoted considerable
attention to this malady, and some of their precepts anticipated
modern discoveries; but no lunatic asylum appears
to have existed in antiquity.<note place='foot'>See Esquirol, <hi rend='italic'>Maladies mentales</hi>.</note> In the first period of the
hermit life, when many anchorites became insane through
their penances, a refuge is said to have been opened for them
at Jerusalem.<note place='foot'>Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>, ch.
xxxvii.</note> This appears, however, to be a solitary
instance, arising from the exigencies of a single class, and no
lunatic asylum existed in Christian Europe till the fifteenth
century. The Mohammedans, in this form of charity, seem
to have preceded the Christians. Benjamin of Tudela, who
visited Bagdad in the twelfth century, describes a palace in
that city, called <q>the House of Mercy,</q> in which all mad
persons found in the country were confined and bound with
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
iron chains. They were carefully examined every month
and released as soon as they recovered.<note place='foot'>Purchas's <hi rend='italic'>Pilgrims</hi>, ii. 1452.</note> The asylum of
Cairo is said to have been founded in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1304.<note place='foot'>Desmaisons' <hi rend='italic'>Asiles d'Aliénés
en Espagne</hi>, p. 53.</note> Leo
Africanus notices the existence of a similar institution at Fez,
in the beginning of the sixteenth century, and mentions that
the patients were restrained by chains,<note place='foot'>Leo Africanus, <hi rend='italic'>Description of
Africa</hi>, book iii.</note> and it is probable
that the care of the insane was a general form of charity
in Mohammedan countries. Among the Christians it first
appeared in quarters contiguous to the Mohammedans; but
there is, I think, no real evidence that it was derived from
Mohammedan example. The Knights of Malta were famous
as the one order who admitted lunatics into their hospitals;
but no Christian asylum expressly for their benefit existed
till 1409. The honour of instituting this form of charity in
Christendom belongs to Spain. A monk named Juan Gilaberto
Joffre, filled with compassion at the sight of the
maniacs who were hooted by crowds through the streets of
Valencia, founded an asylum in that city, and his example
was speedily followed in other provinces. The new charity
was introduced into Saragossa in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1425, into Seville and
Valladolid in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1436, into Toledo in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1483. All these
institutions existed before a single lunatic asylum had been
founded in any other part of Christendom.<note place='foot'>I have taken these facts from
a very interesting little work, Desmaisons,
<hi rend='italic'>Des Asiles d'Aliénés en
Espagne; Recherches historiques et
médicales</hi> (Paris, 1859). Dr. Desmaisons
conjectures that the
Spaniards took their asylums from
the Mohammedans; but, as it
seems to me, he altogether fails to
prove his point. His work, however,
contains some curious information
on the history of lunatic
asylums.</note> Two other very
honourable facts may be mentioned, establishing the preeminence
of Spanish charity in this field. The first is, that
the oldest lunatic asylum in the metropolis of Catholicism
was that erected by Spaniards, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1548.<note place='foot'>Amydemus, <hi rend='italic'>Pietas Romana</hi>
(Oxford, 1687), p. 21; Desmaisons,
p. 108.</note> The second is,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
that when, at the close of the last century, Pinel began his
great labours in this sphere, he pronounced Spain to be the
country in which lunatics were treated with most wisdom
and most humanity.<note place='foot'>Pinel, <hi rend='italic'>Traité médico-philosophique</hi>,
pp. 241, 242.</note>
</p>

<p>
In most countries their condition was indeed truly
deplorable. While many thousands were burnt as witches,
those who were recognised as insane were compelled to
endure all the horrors of the harshest imprisonment.
Blows, bleeding, and chains were their usual treatment, and
horrible accounts were given of madmen who had spent
decades bound in dark cells.<note place='foot'>See the dreadful description
in Pinel, pp. 200-202.</note> Such treatment naturally
aggravated their malady, and that malady in many cases
rendered impossible the resignation and ultimate torpor
which alleviate the sufferings of ordinary prisoners. Not
until the eighteenth century was the condition of this
unhappy class seriously improved. The combined progress of
theological scepticism and scientific knowledge relegated
witchcraft to the world of phantoms, and the exertions of
Morgagni in Italy, of Cullen in Scotland, and of Pinel in
France, renovated the whole treatment of acknowledged
lunatics.
</p>

<p>
The second qualification to the admiration with which we
regard the history of Christian charity arises from the
undoubted fact that a large proportion of charitable institutions
have directly increased the poverty they were intended
to relieve. The question of the utility and nature of charity is
one which, since the modern discoveries of political economy,
has elicited much discussion, and in many cases, I think, much
exaggeration. What political economy has effected on the
subject may be comprised under two heads. It has elucidated
more clearly, and in greater detail than had before been
done, the effect of provident self-interest in determining the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
welfare of societies, and it has established a broad distinction
between productive and unproductive expenditure. It has
shown that, where idleness is supported, idleness will become
common; that, where systematic public provision is made for
old age, the parsimony of foresight will be neglected; and
that therefore these forms of charity, by encouraging habits
of idleness and improvidence, ultimately increase the wretchedness
they were intended to alleviate. It has also shown
that, while unproductive expenditure, such as that which is
devoted to amusements or luxury, is undoubtedly beneficial
to those who provide it, the fruit perishes in the usage; while
productive expenditure, such as the manufacture of machines,
or the improvement of the soil, or the extension of commercial
enterprise, gives a new impulse to the creation of wealth. It
has proved that the first condition of the rapid accumulation
of capital is the diversion of money from unproductive to
productive channels, and that the amount of accumulated
capital is one of the two regulating influences of the wages of
the labourer. From these positions some persons have inferred
that charity should be condemned as a form of unproductive
expenditure. But, in the first place, all charities
that foster habits of forethought and develop new capacities
in the poorer classes, such as popular education, or the
formation of savings banks, or insurance companies, or, in
many cases, small and discriminating loans, or measures
directed to the suppression of dissipation, are in the strictest
sense productive; and the same may be said of many forms
of employment, given in exceptional crises through charitable
motives; and, in the next place, it is only necessary to
remember that the happiness of mankind, to which the
accumulation of wealth should only be regarded as a means,
is the real object of charity, and it will appear that many
forms which are not strictly productive, in the commercial
sense, are in the highest degree conducive to this end, and
have no serious counteracting evil. In the alleviation of
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
those sufferings that do not spring either from improvidence
or from vice, the warmest as well as the most enlightened
charity will find an ample sphere for its exertions.<note place='foot'>Malthus, who is sometimes,
though most unjustly, described as
an enemy to all charity, has devoted
an admirable chapter (<hi rend='italic'>On Population</hi>,
book iv. ch. ix.) to the <q>direction
of our charity;</q> but the
fullest examination of this subject
with which I am acquainted is the
very interesting work of Duchâtel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sur la Charité</hi>.</note> Blindness,
and other exceptional calamities, against the effects of
which prudence does not and cannot provide, the miseries
resulting from epidemics, from war, from famine, from the
first sudden collapse of industry, produced by new inventions
or changes in the channels of commerce; hospitals, which,
besides other advantages, are the greatest schools of medical
science, and withdraw from the crowded alley multitudes
who would otherwise form centres of contagion&mdash;these, and
such as these, will long tax to the utmost the generosity of
the wealthy; while, even in the spheres upon which the
political economist looks with the most unfavourable eye,
exceptional cases will justify exceptional assistance. The
charity which is pernicious is commonly not the highest but
the lowest kind. The rich man, prodigal of money, which is
to him of little value, but altogether incapable of devoting
any personal attention to the object of his alms, often
injures society by his donations; but this is rarely the case
with that far nobler charity which makes men familiar
with the haunts of wretchedness, and follows the object
of its care through all the phases of his life. The question
of the utility of charity is merely a question of ultimate
consequences. Political economy has, no doubt, laid down
some general rules of great value on the subject; but yet
the pages which Cicero devoted to it nearly two thousand
years ago might have been written by the most enlightened
modern economist; and it will be continually found that the
Protestant lady, working in her parish, by the simple force of
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
common sense and by a scrupulous and minute attention to
the condition and character of those whom she relieves, is
unconsciously illustrating with perfect accuracy the enlightened
charity of Malthus.
</p>

<p>
But in order that charity should be useful, it is essential
that the benefit of the sufferer should be a real object to the
donor; and a very large proportion of the evils that have
arisen from Catholic charity may be traced to the absence of
this condition. The first substitution of devotion for philanthropy,
as the motive of benevolence, gave so powerful a
stimulus to the affections, that it may on the whole be regarded
as a benefit, though, by making compassion operate
solely through a theological medium, it often produced among
theologians a more than common indifference to the sufferings
of all who were external to their religious community. But
the new principle speedily degenerated into a belief in the
expiatory nature of the gifts. A form of what may be termed
selfish charity arose, which acquired at last gigantic proportions,
and exercised a most pernicious influence upon Christendom.
Men gave money to the poor, simply and exclusively
for their own spiritual benefit, and the welfare of the sufferer
was altogether foreign to their thoughts.<note place='foot'>This is very tersely expressed
by a great Protestant
writer: <q>I give no alms to satisfy
the hunger of my brother, but to
fulfil and accomplish the will and
command of my God.</q>&mdash;Sir T.
Brown, <hi rend='italic'>Religio Medici</hi>, part ii. § 2.
A saying almost exactly similar is,
if I remember right, ascribed to
St. Elizabeth of Hungary.</note>
</p>

<p>
The evil which thus arose from some forms of Catholic
charity may be traced from a very early period, but it only
acquired its full magnitude after some centuries. The Roman
system of gratuitous distribution was, in the eyes of the political
economist, about the worst that could be conceived, and
the charity of the Church being, in at least a measure, discriminating,
was at first a very great, though even then not
an unmingled, good. Labour was also not unfrequently enjoined
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
as a duty by the Fathers, and at a later period the
services of the Benedictine monks, in destroying by their
example the stigma which slavery had attached to it, were
very great. Still, one of the first consequences of the exuberant
charity of the Church was to multiply impostors and
mendicants, and the idleness of the monks was one of the
earliest complaints. Valentinian made a severe law, condemning
robust beggars to perpetual slavery. As the monastic
system was increased, and especially after the mendicant orders
had consecrated mendicancy, the evil assumed gigantic dimensions.
Many thousands of strong men, absolutely without
private means, were in every country withdrawn from productive
labour, and supported by charity. The notion of the
meritorious nature of simple almsgiving immeasurably multiplied
beggars. The stigma, which it is the highest interest of
society to attach to mendicancy, it became a main object of
theologians to remove. Saints wandered through the world
begging money, that they might give to beggars, or depriving
themselves of their garments, that they might clothe the naked,
and the result of their teaching was speedily apparent. In
all Catholic countries where ecclesiastical influences have been
permitted to develop unmolested, the monastic organisations
have proved a deadly canker, corroding the prosperity of the
nation. Withdrawing multitudes from all production, encouraging
a blind and pernicious almsgiving, diffusing habits
of improvidence through the poorer classes, fostering an ignorant
admiration for saintly poverty, and an equally ignorant
antipathy to the habits and aims of an industrial civilisation,
they have paralysed all energy, and proved an insuperable
barrier to material progress. The poverty they have relieved
has been insignificant compared with the poverty they have
caused. In no case was the abolition of monasteries effected
in a more indefensible manner than in England; but the
transfer of property, that was once employed in a great
measure in charity, to the courtiers of King Henry, was ultimately
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
a benefit to the English poor; for no misapplication
of this property by private persons could produce as much
evil as an unrestrained monasticism. The value of Catholic
services in alleviating pain and sickness, and the more exceptional
forms of suffering, can never be overrated. The noble
heroism of her servants, who have devoted themselves to
charity, has never been surpassed, and the perfection of their
organisation has, I think, never been equalled; but in the
sphere of simple poverty it can hardly be doubted that the
Catholic Church has created more misery than it has cured.
</p>

<p>
Still, even in this field, we must not forget the benefits
resulting, if not to the sufferer, at least to the donor. Charitable
habits, even when formed in the first instance from
selfish motives, even when so misdirected as to be positively
injurious to the recipient, rarely fail to exercise a softening
and purifying influence on the character. All through the
darkest period of the middle ages, amid ferocity and fanaticism
and brutality, we may trace the subduing influence of
Catholic charity, blending strangely with every excess of violence
and every outburst of persecution. It would be difficult
to conceive a more frightful picture of society than is presented
by the history of Gregory of Tours; but that long
series of atrocious crimes, narrated with an almost appalling
tranquillity, is continually interspersed with accounts of kings,
queens, or prelates, who, in the midst of the disorganised
society, made the relief of the poor the main object of their
lives. No period of history exhibits a larger amount of
cruelty, licentiousness, and fanaticism than the Crusades; but
side by side with the military enthusiasm, and with the almost
universal corruption, there expanded a vast movement of
charity, which covered Christendom with hospitals for the
relief of leprosy, and which grappled nobly, though ineffectually,
with the many forms of suffering that were generated.
St. Peter Nolasco, whose great labours in ransoming captive
Christians I have already noticed, was an active participator
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
in the atrocious massacre of the Albigenses.<note place='foot'>See Butler's <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the
Saints</hi>.</note> Of Shane
O'Neale, one of the ablest, but also one of the most ferocious,
Irish chieftains who ever defied the English power, it is related,
amid a crowd of crimes, that, <q>sitting at meat, before
he put one morsel into his mouth he used to slice a portion
above the daily alms, and send it to some beggar at his gate,
saying it was meet to serve Christ first.</q><note place='foot'>Campion's <hi rend='italic'>Historie of Ireland</hi>,
book ii. chap. x.</note>
</p>

<p>
The great evils produced by the encouragement of mendicancy
which has always accompanied the uncontrolled development
of Catholicity, have naturally given rise to much
discussion and legislation. The fierce denunciations of the
mendicant orders by William of St. Amour in the thirteenth
century were not on account of their encouragement of mischievous
charity;<note place='foot'>He wrote his <hi rend='italic'>Perils of the Last
Times</hi> in the interest of the University
of Paris, of which he was
a Professor, and which was at war
with the mendicant orders. See
Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Latin Christianity</hi>, vol.
vi. pp. 348-356; Fleury, <hi rend='italic'>Eccl.
Hist.</hi> lxxxiv. 57.</note> but one of the disciples of Wycliffe, named
Nicholas of Hereford, was conspicuous for his opposition to
indiscriminate gifts to beggars;<note place='foot'>Henry de Knyghton, <hi rend='italic'>De
Eventibus Angliæ</hi>.</note> and a few measures of an
extended order appear to have been taken even before the
Reformation.<note place='foot'>There was some severe legislation
in England on the subject
after the Black Death. Eden's
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Working Classes</hi>,
vol. i. p. 34. In France, too, a
royal ordinance of 1350 ordered
men who had been convicted of
begging three times to be branded
with a hot iron. Monteil, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
des Français</hi>, tome i. p. 434.</note> In England laws of the most savage cruelty
were then passed, in hopes of eradicating mendicancy. A
parliament of Henry VIII., before the suppression of the
monasteries, issued a law providing a system of organised
charity, and imposing on any one who gave anything to a
beggar a fine of ten times the value of his gift. A sturdy
beggar was to be punished with whipping for the first offence,
with whipping and the loss of the tip of his ear for the second
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
and with death for the third.<note place='foot'>Eden, vol. i. pp. 83-87.</note> Under Edward VI., an atrocious
law, which, however, was repealed in the same reign,
enacted that every sturdy beggar who refused to work should
be branded, and adjudged for two years as a slave to the
person who gave information against him; and if he took
flight during his period of servitude, he was condemned for
the first offence to perpetual slavery, and for the second to
death. The master was authorised to put a ring of iron
round the neck of his slave, to chain him, and to scourge him.
Any one might take the children of a sturdy beggar for apprentices,
till the boys were twenty-four and the girls twenty.<note place='foot'>Ibid. pp. 101-103.</note>
Another law, made under Elizabeth, punished with death any
strong man under the age of eighteen who was convicted for
the third time of begging; but the penalty in this reign was
afterwards reduced to a life-long service in the galleys, or to
banishment, with a penalty of death to the returned convict.<note place='foot'>Ibid. pp. 127-130.</note>
Under the same queen the poor-law system was elaborated,
and Malthus long afterwards showed that its effects in discouraging
parsimony rendered it scarcely less pernicious than
the monastic system that had preceded it. In many Catholic
countries, severe, though less atrocious, measures were taken
to grapple with the evil of mendicancy. That shrewd and
sagacious pontiff, Sixtus V., who, though not the greatest
man, was by far the greatest statesman who has ever sat on
the papal throne, made praiseworthy efforts to check it at
Rome, where ecclesiastical influence had always made it peculiarly
prevalent.<note place='foot'>Morighini, <hi rend='italic'>Institutions pieuses
de Rome</hi>.</note> Charles V., in 1531, issued a severe enactment
against beggars in the Netherlands, but excepted
from its operation mendicant friars and pilgrims.<note place='foot'>Eden, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Labouring
Classes</hi>, i. 83.</note> Under
Lewis XIV., equally severe measures were taken in France.
But though the practical evil was fully felt, there was little
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
philosophical investigation of its causes before the eighteenth
century. Locke in England,<note place='foot'>Locke discussed the great increase
of poverty, and a bill was
brought in suggesting some remedies,
but did not pass. (Eden, vol.
i. pp. 243-248.)</note> and Berkeley in Ireland,<note place='foot'>In a very forcible letter addressed
to the Irish Catholic clergy.</note>
briefly glanced at the subject; and in 1704 Defoe published a
very remarkable tract, called, <q>Giving Alms no Charity,</q> in
which he noticed the extent to which mendicancy existed in
England, though wages were higher than in any Continental
country.<note place='foot'>This tract, which is extremely
valuable for the light it throws
upon the social condition of England
at the time, was written in
opposition to a bill providing that
the poor in the poor-houses should
do wool, hemp, iron, and other
works. Defoe says that wages in
England were higher than anywhere
on the Continent, though the
amount of mendicancy was enormous.
<q>The reason why so many pretend
to want work is, that they can
live so well with the pretence of
wanting work.... I affirm of my own
knowledge, when I have wanted
a man for labouring work, and
offered nine shillings per week to
strolling fellows at my door, they
have frequently told me to my face
they could get more a-begging.</q></note> A still more remarkable book, written by an author
named Ricci, appeared at Modena in 1787, and excited considerable
attention. The author pointed out with much force
the gigantic development of mendicancy in Italy, traced it to
the excessive charity of the people, and appears to have regarded
as an evil all charity which sprang from religious
motives and was greater than would spring from the unaided
instincts of men.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reforma degl' Instituti pii di
Modena</hi> (published first anonymously
at Modena). It has been
reprinted in the library of the
Italian economists.</note> The freethinker Mandeville had long before
assailed charity schools, and the whole system of endeavouring
to elevate the poor,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Essay on Charity Schools.</hi></note> and Magdalen asylums and foundling
hospitals have had fierce, though I believe much mistaken,
adversaries.<note place='foot'>Magdalen asylums have been
very vehemently assailed by M.
Charles Comte, in his <hi rend='italic'>Traité de
Législation</hi>. On the subject of
Foundling Hospitals there is a
whole literature. They were violently
attacked by, I believe, Lord
Brougham, in the <hi rend='italic'>Edinburgh Review</hi>,
in the early part of this century.
Writers of this stamp, and
indeed most political economists,
greatly exaggerate the forethought
of men and women, especially in
matters where the passions are concerned.
It may be questioned
whether one woman in a hundred,
who plunges into a career of vice,
is in the smallest degree influenced
by a consideration of whether or
not charitable institutions are provided
for the support of aged penitents.</note> The reforms of the poor-laws, and the writings
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
of Malthus, gave a new impulse to discussion on the subject;
but, with the qualifications I have stated, no new discoveries
have, I conceive, thrown any just cloud upon the essential
principle of Christian charity.
</p>

<p>
The last method by which Christianity has laboured to
soften the characters of men has been by accustoming the
imagination to expatiate continually upon images of tenderness
and of pathos. Our imaginations, though less influential
than our occupations, probably affect our moral characters
more deeply than our judgments, and, in the case of the
poorer classes especially, the cultivation of this part of our
nature is of inestimable importance. Rooted, for the most
part, during their entire lives, to a single spot, excluded by
their ignorance and their circumstances from most of the
varieties of interest that animate the minds of other men,
condemned to constant and plodding labour, and engrossed
for ever with the minute cares of an immediate and an
anxious present, their whole natures would have been hopelessly
contracted, were there no sphere in which their imaginations
could expand. Religion is the one romance of the
poor. It alone extends the narrow horizon of their thoughts,
supplies the images of their dreams, allures them to the supersensual
and the ideal. The graceful beings with which the
creative fancy of Paganism peopled the universe shed a poetic
glow on the peasant's toil. Every stage of agriculture was
presided over by a divinity, and the world grew bright by
the companionship of the gods. But it is the peculiarity of
the Christian types, that, while they have fascinated the
imagination, they have also purified the heart. The tender,
winning, and almost feminine beauty of the Christian
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
Founder, the Virgin mother, the agonies of Gethsemane or
of Calvary, the many scenes of compassion and suffering that
fill the sacred writings, are the pictures which, for eighteen
hundred years, have governed the imaginations of the rudest
and most ignorant of mankind. Associated with the fondest
recollections of childhood, with the music of the church bells,
with the clustered lights and the tinsel splendour, that seem
to the peasant the very ideal of majesty; painted over the
altar where he received the companion of his life, around the
cemetery where so many whom he had loved were laid, on
the stations of the mountain, on the portal of the vineyard,
on the chapel where the storm-tossed mariner fulfils his
grateful vow; keeping guard over his cottage door, and looking
down upon his humble bed, forms of tender beauty and
gentle pathos for ever haunt the poor man's fancy, and
silently win their way into the very depths of his being.
More than any spoken eloquence, more than any dogmatic
teaching, they transform and subdue his character, till he
learns to realise the sanctity of weakness and suffering, the
supreme majesty of compassion and gentleness.
</p>

<p>
Imperfect and inadequate as is the sketch I have drawn,
it will be sufficient to show how great and multiform have
been the influences of Christian philanthropy. The shadows
that rest upon the picture, I have not concealed; but, when
all due allowance has been made for them, enough will
remain to claim our deepest admiration. The high conception
that has been formed of the sanctity of human life, the
protection of infancy, the elevation and final emancipation of
the slave classes, the suppression of barbarous games, the
creation of a vast and multifarious organisation of charity,
and the education of the imagination by the Christian type,
constitute together a movement of philanthropy which has
never been paralleled or approached in the Pagan world. The
effects of this movement in promoting happiness have been
very great. Its effect in determining character has probably
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
been still greater. In that proportion or disposition of
qualities which constitutes the ideal character, the gentler
and more benevolent virtues have obtained, through Christianity,
the foremost place. In the first and purest period
they were especially supreme; but in the third century a great
ascetic movement arose, which gradually brought a new type
of character into the ascendant, and diverted the enthusiasm
of the Church into new channels.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Tertullian, writing in the second century, contrasts, in a
well-known passage, the Christians of his day with the gymnosophists
or hermits of India, declaring that, unlike these,
the Christians did not fly from the world, but mixed with
Pagans in the forum, in the market-places, in the public
baths, in the ordinary business of life.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> ch. xlii.</note> But although the
life of the hermit or the monk was unknown in the Church
for more than two hundred years after its foundation, we
may detect, almost from the earliest time, a tone of feeling
which produces it. The central conceptions of the monastic
system are the meritoriousness of complete abstinence from
all sexual intercourse, and of complete renunciation of the
world. The first of these notions appeared in the very
earliest period, in the respect attached to the condition of
virginity, which was always regarded as sacred, and especially
esteemed in the clergy, though for a long time it was not
imposed as an obligation. The second was shown in the
numerous efforts that were made to separate the Christian
community as far as possible from the society in which it
existed. Nothing could be more natural than that, when
the increase and triumph of the Church had thrown the bulk
of the Christians into active political or military labour,
some should, as an exercise of piety, have endeavoured
to imitate the separation from the world which was once
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
the common condition of all. Besides this, a movement of
asceticism had long been raging like a mental epidemic through
the world. Among the Jews&mdash;whose law, from the great
stress it laid upon marriage, the excellence of the rapid multiplication
of population, and the hope of being the ancestor
of the Messiah, was peculiarly repugnant to monastic conceptions&mdash;the
Essenes had constituted a complete monastic
society, abstaining from marriage and separating themselves
wholly from the world. In Rome, whose practical genius
was, if possible, even more opposed than that of the Jews to
an inactive monasticism, and even among those philosophers
who most represented its active and practical spirit, the
same tendency was shown. The Cynics of the later Empire
recommended a complete renunciation of domestic ties,
and a life spent mainly in the contemplation of wisdom.
The Egyptian philosophy, that soon after acquired an ascendancy
in Europe, anticipated still more closely the monastic
ideal. On the outskirts of the Church, the many sects of
Gnostics and Manicheans all held under different forms the
essential evil of matter. The Docetæ, following the same
notion, denied the reality of the body of Christ. The Montanists
and the Novatians surpassed and stimulated the private
penances of the orthodox.<note place='foot'>On these penances, see Bingham,
<hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> book vii. Bingham,
I think, justly divides the history
of asceticism into three periods.
During the first, which extends
from the foundation of the Church
to <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 250, there were men and
women who, with a view to spiritual
perfection, abstained from marriage,
relinquished amusements,
accustomed themselves to severe
fasts, and gave up their property
to works of charity; but did this
in the middle of society and without
leading the life of either a
hermit or a monk. During the
second period, which extended from
the Decian persecution, anchorites
were numerous, but the custom of
a common or cœnobitic life was unknown.
It was originated in the
time of Constantine by Pachomius.</note> The soil was thus thoroughly
prepared for a great outburst of asceticism, whenever the first
seed was sown. This was done during the Decian persecution.
Paul, the hermit, who fled to the desert during that
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
persecution, is said to have been the first of the tribe.<note place='foot'>This is expressly stated by
St. Jerome (<hi rend='italic'>Vit. Pauli</hi>).</note>
Antony, who speedily followed, greatly extended the movement,
and in a few years the hermits had become a mighty
nation. Persecution, which in the first instance drove great
numbers as fugitives to the deserts, soon aroused a passionate
religious enthusiasm that showed itself in an ardent desire
for those sufferings which were believed to lead directly to
heaven; and this enthusiasm, after the peace of Constantine,
found its natural vent and sphere in the macerations of the
desert life. The imaginations of men were fascinated by the
poetic circumstances of that life which St. Jerome most eloquently
embellished. Women were pre-eminent in recruiting
for it. The same spirit that had formerly led the wife
of the Pagan official to entertain secret relations with the
Christian priests, now led the wife of the Christian to become
the active agent of the monks. While the father designed
his son for the army, or for some civil post, the mother
was often straining every nerve to induce him to become a
hermit. The monks secretly corresponded with her, they
skilfully assumed the functions of education, in order that
they might influence the young; and sometimes, to evade
the precautions or the anger of the father, they concealed
their profession, and assumed the garb of lay pedagogues.<note place='foot'>See on this subject some curious
evidence in Neander's <hi rend='italic'>Life of
Chrysostom</hi>. St. Chrysostom wrote
a long work to console fathers whose
sons were thus seduced to the
desert.</note>
The pulpit, which had almost superseded, and
immeasurably transcended in influence, the chairs of the
rhetoricians, and which was filled by such men as Ambrose,
Augustine, Chrysostom, Basil, and the Gregories, was continually
exerted in the same cause, and the extreme
luxury of the great cities produced a violent, but not unnatural,
reaction of asceticism. The dignity of the monastic
position, which sometimes brought men who had been simple
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
peasants into connection with the emperors, the security it
furnished to fugitive slaves and criminals, the desire of
escaping from those fiscal burdens which, in the corrupt and
oppressive administration of the Empire, had acquired an
intolerable weight, and especially the barbarian invasions,
which produced every variety of panic and wretchedness,
conspired with the new religious teaching in peopling the
desert. A theology of asceticism was speedily formed. The
examples of Elijah and Elisha, to the first of whom, by a
bold flight of imagination, some later Carmelites ascribed
the origin of their order, and the more recent instance of the
Baptist, were at once adduced. To an ordinary layman the
life of an anchorite might appear in the highest degree opposed
to that of the Teacher who began His mission at a marriage
feast; who was continually reproached by His enemies for
the readiness with which He mixed with the world, and who
selected from the female sex some of His purest and most
devoted followers; but the monkish theologians, avoiding,
for the most part, these topics, dilated chiefly on His immaculate
birth, His virgin mother, His life of celibacy, His exhortation
to the rich young man. The fact that St. Peter, to
whom a general primacy was already ascribed, was unquestionably
married was a difficulty which was in a measure
met by a tradition that both he, and the other married
apostles, abstained from intercourse with their wives after
their conversion.<note place='foot'>On this tradition see Champagny, <hi rend='italic'>Les Antonins</hi>, tome i. p. 193.</note> St. Paul, however, was probably unmarried,
and his writings showed a decided preference for
the unmarried state, which the ingenuity of theologians also
discovered in some quarters where it might be least expected.
Thus, St. Jerome assures us that when the clean animals
entered the ark by sevens, and the unclean ones by pairs, the
odd number typified the celibate, and the even the married
condition. Even of the unclean animals but one pair of each
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
kind was admitted, lest they should perpetrate the enormity
of second marriage.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxiii.</note> Ecclesiastical tradition sustained the
tendency, and Saint James, as he has been portrayed by
Hegesippus, became a kind of ideal saint, a faithful picture
of what, according to the notions of theologians, was the true
type of human nobility. He <q>was consecrated,</q> it was said,
<q>from his mother's womb. He drank neither wine nor fermented
liquors, and abstained from animal food. A razor
never came upon his head. He never anointed himself with
oil, or used a bath. He alone was allowed to enter the sanctuary.
He never wore woollen, but linen, garments. He was
in the habit of entering the temple alone, and was often found
upon his bended knees, and interceding for the forgiveness of
the people, so that his knees became as hard as a camel's.</q><note place='foot'>Euseb. <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. Hist.</hi> ii. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
The progress of the monastic movement, as has been
truly said, <q>was not less rapid or universal than that of
Christianity itself.</q><note place='foot'>Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>, ch.
xxxvii.; a brief but masterly sketch
of the progress of the movement.</note> Of the actual number of the anchorites,
those who are acquainted with the extreme unveracity of the
first historians of the movement will hesitate to speak with
confidence. It is said that St. Pachomius, who, early in the
fourth century, founded the cœnobitic mode of life, enlisted
under his jurisdiction 7,000 monks;<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> xxxviii.</note> that in the days of St.
Jerome nearly 50,000 monks were sometimes assembled at
the Easter festivals;<note place='foot'>Jerome, Preface to the Rule
of St. Pachomius, § 7.</note> that in the desert of Nitria alone there
were, in the fourth century, 5,000 monks under a single
abbot;<note place='foot'>Cassian, <hi rend='italic'>De Cœnob. Inst.</hi> iv. 1.</note> that an Egyptian city named Oxyrynchus devoted itself
almost exclusively to the ascetic life, and included 20,000
virgins and 10,000 monks;<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi> ch. v.
Rufinus visited it himself.</note> that St. Serapion presided over
10,000 monks;<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> lxxvi.</note> and that, towards the close of the fourth
century, the monastic population in a great part of Egypt
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
was nearly equal to the population of the cities.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Mon.</hi> vii.</note> Egypt
was the parent of monachism, and it was there that it attained
both its extreme development and its most austere severity;
but there was very soon scarcely any Christian country in
which a similar movement was not ardently propagated. St.
Athanasius and St. Zeno are said to have introduced it into
Italy,<note place='foot'>There is a good deal of doubt
and controversy about this. See a
note in Mosheim's <hi rend='italic'>Eccl. Hist.</hi>
(Soame's edition), vol. i. p. 354.</note> where it soon afterwards received a great stimulus
from St. Jerome. St. Hilarion instituted the first monks in
Palestine, and he lived to see many thousands subject to his
rule, and towards the close of his life to plant monachism in
Cyprus. Eustathius, Bishop of Sebastia, spread it through
Armenia, Paphlagonia, and Pontus. St. Basil laboured
along the wild shores of the Euxine. St. Martin of Tours
founded the first monastery in Gaul, and 2,000 monks attended
his funeral. Unrecorded missionaries planted the
new institution in the heart of Æthiopia, amid the little
islands that stud the Mediterranean, in the secluded valleys
of Wales and Ireland.<note place='foot'>Most of the passages remaining
on the subject of the foundation of
monachism are given by Thomassin,
<hi rend='italic'>Discipline de l'Église</hi>, part i.
livre iii. ch. xii. This work contains
also much general information
about monachism. A curious
collection of statistics of the numbers
of the monks in different
localities, additional to those I
have given and gleaned from the
<hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi>, may be found
in Pitra (<hi rend='italic'>Vie de St. Léger</hi>, Introd.
p. lix.); 2,100, or, according to
another account, 3,000 monks, lived
in the monastery of Banchor.</note> But even more wonderful than the
many thousands who thus abandoned the world is the reverence
with which they were regarded by those who, by their
attainments or their character, would seem most opposed to
the monastic ideal. No one had more reason than Augustine
to know the danger of enforced celibacy, but St. Augustine
exerted all his energies to spread monasticism through his
diocese. St. Ambrose, who was by nature an acute statesman;
St. Jerome and St. Basil, who were ambitious scholars;
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
St. Chrysostom, who was pre-eminently formed to sway the
refined throngs of a metropolis&mdash;all exerted their powers in
favour of the life of solitude, and the last three practised it
themselves. St. Arsenius, who was surpassed by no one in
the extravagance of his penances, had held a high office at
the court of the Emperor Arcadius. Pilgrims wandered
among the deserts, collecting accounts of the miracles and
the austerities of the saints, which filled Christendom with
admiration; and the strange biographies which were thus
formed, wild and grotesque as they are, enable us to realise
very vividly the general features of the anchorite life which
became the new ideal of the Christian world.<note place='foot'><p>The three principal are the
<hi rend='italic'>Historia Monachorum</hi> of Rufinus,
who visited Egypt <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 373, about
seventeen years after the death of
St. Antony; the <hi rend='italic'>Institutiones</hi> of
Cassian, who, having visited the
Eastern monks about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 394,
founded vast monasteries containing,
it is said, 5,000 monks, at
Marseilles, and died at a great age
about <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 448; and the <hi rend='italic'>Historia
Lausiaca</hi> (so called from Lausus,
Governor of Cappadocia) of Palladius,
who was himself a hermit
on Mount Nitria, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 388. The
first and last, as well as many
minor works of the same period,
are given in Rosweyde's invaluable
collection of the lives of the Fathers,
one of the most fascinating
volumes in the whole range of
literature.
</p>
<p>
The hospitality of the monks
was not without drawbacks. In a
church on Mount Nitria three
whips were hung on a palm-tree&mdash;one
for chastising monks, another
for chastising thieves, and a third
for chastising guests. (Palladius,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> vii.)</p></note>
</p>

<p>
There is, perhaps, no phase in the moral history of mankind
of a deeper or more painful interest than this ascetic
epidemic. A hideous, sordid, and emaciated maniac, without
knowledge, without patriotism, without natural affection,
passing his life in a long routine of useless and atrocious
self-torture, and quailing before the ghastly phantoms of his
delirious brain, had become the ideal of the nations which
had known the writings of Plato and Cicero and the lives of
Socrates and Cato. For about two centuries, the hideous
maceration of the body was regarded as the highest proof of
excellence. St. Jerome declares, with a thrill of admiration,
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
how he had seen a monk, who for thirty years had lived
exclusively on a small portion of barley bread and of muddy
water; another, who lived in a hole and never ate more than
five figs for his daily repast;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vita Pauli.</hi> St. Jerome adds,
that some will not believe this,
because they have no faith, but
that all things are possible for
those that believe.</note> a third, who cut his hair only
on Easter Sunday, who never washed his clothes, who never
changed his tunic till it fell to pieces, who starved himself
till his eyes grew dim, and his skin <q>like a pumice stone,</q>
and whose merits, shown by these austerities, Homer himself
would be unable to recount.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vita St. Hilarion.</hi></note> For six months, it is said,
St. Macarius of Alexandria slept in a marsh, and exposed his
body naked to the stings of venomous flies. He was accustomed
to carry about with him eighty pounds of iron.
His disciple, St. Eusebius, carried one hundred and fifty
pounds of iron, and lived for three years in a dried-up well.
St. Sabinus would only eat corn that had become rotten
by remaining for a month in water. St. Besarion spent
forty days and nights in the middle of thorn-bushes, and for
forty years never lay down when he slept,<note place='foot'>See a long list of these penances
in Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém. pour
servir à l'Hist. ecclés.</hi> tome viii.</note> which last penance
was also during fifteen years practised by St. Pachomius.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi> (Pachomius). He
used to lean against a wall when
overcome by drowsiness.</note>
Some saints, like St. Marcian, restricted themselves to one
meal a day, so small that they continually suffered the pangs
of hunger.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi>, ix. 3.</note> Of one of them it is related that his daily food
was six ounces of bread and a few herbs; that he was never
seen to recline on a mat or bed, or even to place his limbs
easily for sleep; but that sometimes, from excess of weariness,
his eyes would close at his meals, and the food would
drop from his mouth.<note place='foot'>Sozomen, vi. 29.</note> Other saints, however, ate only
every second day;<note place='foot'>E.g. St. Antony, according to
his biographer St. Athanasius.</note> while many, if we could believe the
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
monkish historian, abstained for whole weeks from all
nourishment.<note place='foot'><q>Il y eut dans le désert de
Scété des solitaires d'une éminente
perfection.... On prétend que
pour l'ordinaire ils passoient des
semaines entières sans manger,
mais apparemment cela ne se faisoit
que dans des occasions particulières.</q>&mdash;Tillemont,
<hi rend='italic'>Mém. pour
servir à l'Hist. eccl.</hi> tome viii. p.
580. Even this, however, was admirable!</note> St. Macarius of Alexandria is said during
an entire week to have never lain down, or eaten anything
but a few uncooked herbs on Sunday.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> cap. xx.</note> Of another
famous saint, named John, it is asserted that for three
whole years he stood in prayer, leaning upon a rock; that
during all that time he never sat or lay down, and that
his only nourishment was the Sacrament, which was brought
him on Sundays.<note place='foot'><q>Primum cum accessisset ad
eremum tribus continuis annis sub
cujusdam saxi rupe stans, semper
oravit, ita ut nunquam omnino resederit
neque Jacuerit. Somni autem
tantum caperet, quantum stans
capere potuit; cibum vero nunquam
sumpserat nisi die Dominica.
Presbyter enim tunc veniebat ad
eum et offerebat pro eo sacrificium
idque ei solum sacramentum erat
et victus.</q>&mdash;Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi>
cap. xv.</note> Some of the hermits lived in deserted
dens of wild beasts, others in dried-up wells, while others
found a congenial resting-place among the tombs.<note place='foot'>Thus St. Antony used to live
in a tomb, where he was beaten by
the devil. (St. Athanasius, <hi rend='italic'>Life of
Antony.</hi>)</note> Some
disdained all clothes, and crawled abroad like the wild beasts,
covered only by their matted hair. In Mesopotamia, and
part of Syria, there existed a sect known by the name of
<q>Grazers,</q> who never lived under a roof, who ate neither
flesh nor bread, but who spent their time for ever on the
mountain side, and ate grass like cattle.<note place='foot'>βοσκοί. See on these monks
Sozomen, vi. 33; Evagrius, i. 21.
It is mentioned of a certain St.
Marc of Athens, that, having lived
for thirty years naked in the desert,
his body was covered with
hair like that of a wild beast.
(Bollandists, March 29.) St. Mary
of Egypt, during part of her period
of penance, lived upon grass.
(<hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum.</hi>)</note> The cleanliness
of the body was regarded as a pollution of the soul, and
the saints who were most admired had become one hideous
mass of clotted filth. St. Athanasius relates with enthusiasm
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
how St. Antony, the patriarch of monachism, had
never, to extreme old age, been guilty of washing his feet.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Life of Antony.</hi></note>
The less constant St. Pœmen fell into this habit for the
first time when a very old man, and, with a glimmering of
common sense, defended himself against the astonished monks
by saying that he had <q>learnt to kill not his body, but his
passions.</q><note place='foot'><q>II ne faisoit pas aussi difficulté
dans sa vieillesse de se laver
quelquefois les piez. Et comme on
témoignoit s'en étonner et trouver
que cela ne répondoit pas à la vie
austère des anciens, il se justifioit
par ces paroles: Nous avons appris
à tuer, non pas notre corps mais
nos passions.</q>&mdash;Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém.
Hist. eccl.</hi> tome xv. p. 148. This
saint was so very virtuous, that
he sometimes remained without
eating for whole weeks.</note> St. Abraham the hermit, however, who lived
for fifty years after his conversion, rigidly refused from that
date to wash either his face or his feet.<note place='foot'><q>Non appropinquavit oleum
corpusculo ejus. Facies vel etiam
pedes a die conversionis suæ nunquam
diluti sunt.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi>,
c. xvii.</note> He was, it is said,
a person of singular beauty, and his biographer somewhat
strangely remarks that <q>his face reflected the purity of his
soul.</q><note place='foot'><q>In facie ejus puritas animi
noscebatur.</q>&mdash;Ibid. c. xviii.</note> St. Ammon had never seen himself naked.<note place='foot'>Socrates, iv. 23.</note> A
famous virgin named Silvia, though she was sixty years old
and though bodily sickness was a consequence of her habits,
resolutely refused, on religious principles, to wash any part
of her body except her fingers.<note place='foot'>Heraclidis Paradisus (Rosweyde),
c. xlii.</note> St. Euphraxia joined a convent
of one hundred and thirty nuns, who never washed
their feet, and who shuddered at the mention of a bath.<note place='foot'><q>Nulla earum pedes suos abluebat;
aliquantæ vero audientes de
balneo loqui, irridentes, confusionem
et magnam abominationem se
audire judicabant, quæ neque audi
tum suum hoc audire patiebantur.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vit.
S. Euphrax.</hi> c. vi. (Rosweyde.)</note> An
anchorite once imagined that he was mocked by an illusion
of the devil, as he saw gliding before him through the desert
a naked creature black with filth and years of exposure, and
with white hair floating to the wind. It was a once beautiful
woman, St. Mary of Egypt, who had thus, during forty-seven
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
years, been expiating her sins.<note place='foot'>See her acts, Bollandists, April
2, and in the <hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi>.</note> The occasional decadence
of the monks into habits of decency was a subject of much
reproach. <q>Our fathers,</q> said the abbot Alexander, looking
mournfully back to the past, <q>never washed their faces, but
we frequent the public baths.</q><note place='foot'><q>Patres nostri nunquam facies
suas lavabant, nos autem lavacra
publica balneaque frequentamus.</q>&mdash;Moschus,
<hi rend='italic'>Pratum Spirituale</hi>,
clxviii.</note> It was related of one monastery
in the desert, that the monks suffered greatly from
want of water to drink; but at the prayer of the abbot
Theodosius a copious stream was produced. But soon some
monks, tempted by the abundant supply, diverged from their
old austerity, and persuaded the abbot to avail himself of
the stream for the construction of a bath. The bath was
made. Once, and once only, did the monks enjoy their
ablutions, when the stream ceased to flow. Prayers, tears,
and fastings were in vain. A whole year passed. At last
the abbot destroyed the bath, which was the object of the
Divine displeasure, and the waters flowed afresh.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Pratum Spirituale</hi>, lxxx.
</p>
<p>
An Irish saint, named Coemgenus,
is said to have shown his
devotion in a way which was directly
opposite to that of the other
saints I have mentioned&mdash;by his
special use of cold water&mdash;but the
principle in each case was the same&mdash;to
mortify nature. St. Coemgenus
was accustomed to pray for
an hour every night in a pool of
cold water, while the devil sent a
horrible beast to swim round him.
An angel, however, was sent to him
for three purposes. <q>Tribus de
causis à Domino missus est angelus
ibi ad S. Coemgenum. Prima ut a
diversis suis gravibus laboribus
levius viveret paulisper; secunda
ut horridam bestiam sancto infestam
repelleret; tertia <emph>ut frigiditatem
aquæ calefaceret</emph>.</q>&mdash;Bollandists,
June 3. The editors say these
acts are of doubtful authenticity.</p></note> But of
all the evidences of the loathsome excesses to which this
spirit was carried, the life of St. Simeon Stylites is probably
the most remarkable. It would be difficult to conceive a
more horrible or disgusting picture than is given of the
penances by which that saint commenced his ascetic career.
He had bound a rope around him so that it became imbedded
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
in his flesh, which putrefied around it. <q>A horrible
stench, intolerable to the bystanders, exhaled from his body
and worms dropped from him whenever he moved, and they
filled his bed.</q> Sometimes he left the monastery and slept in
a dry well, inhabited, it is said, by dæmons. He built successively
three pillars, the last being sixty feet high and
scarcely two cubits in circumference, and on this pillar,
during thirty years, he remained exposed to every change of
climate, ceaselessly and rapidly bending his body in prayer
almost to the level of his feet. A spectator attempted to
number these rapid motions, but desisted from weariness
when he had counted 1,244. For a whole year, we are told,
St. Simeon stood upon one leg, the other being covered with
hideous ulcers, while his biographer was commissioned to
stand by his side, to pick up the worms that fell from his
body, and to replace them in the sores, the saint saying to
the worm, <q>Eat what God has given you.</q> From every
quarter pilgrims of every degree thronged to do him homage.
A crowd of prelates followed him to the grave. A brilliant
star is said to have shone miraculously over his pillar; the
general voice of mankind pronounced him to be the highest
model of a Christian saint; and several other anchorites imitated
or emulated his penances.<note place='foot'>See his Life by his disciple
Antony, in the <hi rend='italic'>Vitæ Patrum</hi>, Evagrius,
i. 13, 14. Theodoret, <hi rend='italic'>Philotheos</hi>,
cap. xxvi.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is, if I mistake not, no department of literature the
importance of which is more inadequately realised than the
lives of the saints. Even where they have no direct historical
value, they have a moral value of the very highest order.
They may not tell us with accuracy what men did at particular
epochs; but they display with the utmost vividness
what they thought and felt, their measure of probability, and
their ideal of excellence. Decrees of councils, elaborate treatises
of theologians, creeds, liturgies, and canons, are all but
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
the husks of religious history. They reveal what was professed
and argued before the world, but not that which was
realised in the imagination or enshrined in the heart. The
history of art, which in its ruder day reflected with delicate
fidelity the fleeting images of an anthropomorphic age, is in
this respect invaluable; but still more important is that vast
Christian mythology, which grew up spontaneously from the
intellectual condition of the time, included all its dearest
hopes, wishes, ideals, and imaginings, and constituted, during
many centuries, the popular literature of Christendom. In
the case of the saints of the deserts, there can be no question
that the picture&mdash;which is drawn chiefly by eye-witnesses&mdash;however
grotesque may be some of its details, is in its leading
features historically true. It is true that self-torture was for
some centuries regarded as the chief measure of human excellence,
that tens of thousands of the most devoted men fled
to the desert to reduce themselves by maceration nearly to the
condition of the brute, and that this odious superstition had
acquired an almost absolute ascendancy in the ethics of the age.
The examples of asceticism I have cited are but a few out of
many hundreds, and volumes might be written, and have been
written, detailing them. Till the reform of St. Benedict, the
ideal was on the whole unchanged. The Western monks, from
the conditions of their climate, were constitutionally incapable
of rivalling the abstinence of the Egyptian anchorites; but
their conception of supreme excellence was much the same,
and they laboured to compensate for their inferiority in
penances by claiming some superiority in miracles. From
the time of St. Pachomius, the cœnobitic life was adopted by
most monks; but the Eastern monasteries, with the important
exception of a vow of obedience, differed little from a
collection of hermitages. They were in the deserts; the monks
commonly lived in separate cells; they kept silence at their
repasts; they rivalled one another in the extravagance of
their penances. A few feeble efforts were indeed made by
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
St. Jerome and others to moderate austerities, which frequently
led to insanity and suicide, to check the turbulence
of certain wandering monks, who were accustomed to defy
the ecclesiastical authorities, and especially to suppress monastic
mendicancy, which had appeared prominently among
some heretical sects. The orthodox monks commonly employed
themselves in weaving mats of palm-leaves; but,
living in the deserts, with no wants, they speedily sank into
a listless apathy; and the most admired were those who,
like Simeon Stylites, and the hermit John, of whom I have
already spoken, were most exclusively devoted to their superstition.
Diversities of individual character were, however,
vividly displayed. Many anchorites, without knowledge,
passions, or imagination, having fled from servile toil to the
calm of the wilderness, passed the long hours in sleep or in a
mechanical routine of prayer, and their inert and languid
existences, prolonged to the extreme of old age, closed at last
by a tranquil and almost animal death. Others made their
cells by the clear fountains and clustering palm-trees of some
oasis in the desert, and a blooming garden arose beneath their
toil. The numerous monks who followed St. Serapion devoted
themselves largely to agriculture, and sent shiploads of
corn for the benefit of the poor.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> lxxvi.</note> Of one old hermit it is
related that, such was the cheerfulness of his mind, that
every sorrow was dispelled by his presence, and the weary
and the heartbroken were consoled by a few words from his
lips.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, Hist. <hi rend='italic'>Monach.</hi> xxxiii.</note> More commonly, however, the hermit's cell was the
scene of perpetual mourning. Tears and sobs, and frantic
strugglings with imaginary dæmons, and paroxysms of religious
despair, were the texture of his life, and the dread of
spiritual enemies, and of that death which his superstition
had rendered so terrible, embittered every hour of his existence.<note place='foot'>We have a striking illustration
of this in St. Arsenius. His
eyelashes are said to have fallen
off through continual weeping,
and he had always, when at work,
to put a cloth on his breast to
receive his tears. As he felt his
death approaching, his terror rose
to the point of agony. The monks
who were about him said, <q><q>Quid
fles, pater? numquid et tu times?</q>
Ille respondit, <q>In veritate timeo
et iste timor qui nunc mecum est,
semper in me fuit, ex quo factus
sum monachus.</q></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>,
Prol. § 163. It was said of
St. Abraham that no day passed
after his conversion without his
shedding tears. (<hi rend='italic'>Vit. Patrum.</hi>)
St. John the dwarf once saw a
monk laughing immoderately at
dinner, and was so horrified that
he at once began to cry. (Tillemont,
<hi rend='italic'>Mém. de l'Hist. ecclés.</hi> tome
x. p. 430.) St. Basil (<hi rend='italic'>Regulæ</hi>, interrog.
xvii.) gives a remarkable
disquisition on the wickedness of
laughing, and he observes that this
was the one bodily affection which
Christ does not seem to have
known. Mr. Buckle has collected
a series of passages to precisely the
same effect from the writings of
the Scotch divines. (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Civilisation</hi>,
vol. ii. pp. 385-386.)</note>
The solace of intellectual occupations was rarely
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
resorted to. <q>The duty,</q> said St. Jerome, <q>of a monk is not to
teach, but to weep.</q><note place='foot'><q>Monachus autem non doctoris
habet sed plangentis officium.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Contr.
Vigilant.</hi> xv.</note> A cultivated and disciplined mind was
the least subject to those hallucinations, which were regarded
as the highest evidence of Divine favour;<note place='foot'>As Tillemont puts it: <q>Il se
trouva très-peu de saints en qui
Dieu ait joint les talens extérieurs
de l'éloquence et de la science avec
la grâce de la prophétie et des
miracles. Ce sont des dons que sa
Providence a presque toujours
séparés.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mém. Hist. ecclés.</hi> tome
iv. p. 315.</note> and although
in an age when the passion for asceticism was general, many
scholars became ascetics, the great majority of the early monks
appear to have been men who were not only absolutely
ignorant themselves, but who also looked upon learning with
positive disfavour. St. Antony, the true founder of monachism,
refused when a boy to learn letters, because it would
bring him into too great intercourse with other boys.<note place='foot'>St. Athanasius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Anton.</hi></note> At a
time when St. Jerome had suffered himself to feel a deep admiration
for the genius of Cicero, he was, as he himself tells
us, borne in the night before the tribunal of Christ, accused
of being rather a Ciceronian than a Christian, and severely
flagellated by the angels.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxii. He says his shoulders
were bruised when he awoke.</note> This saint, however, afterwards
modified his opinions about the Pagan writings, and he was
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
compelled to defend himself at length against his more jealous
brethren, who accused him of defiling his writings with quotations
from Pagan authors, of employing some monks in
copying Cicero, and of explaining Virgil to some children at
Bethlehem.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lxx.; <hi rend='italic'>Adv. Rufinum</hi>, lib.
i. ch. xxx. He there speaks of his
vision as a mere dream, not binding.
He elsewhere (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxv.)
speaks very sensibly of the advantage
of hermits occupying themselves,
and says he learnt Hebrew
to keep away unholy thoughts.</note> Of one monk it is related that, being especially
famous as a linguist, he made it his penance to remain perfectly
silent for thirty years;<note place='foot'>Sozomen, vi. 28; Rufinus,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi> ch. vi. Socrates
tells rather a touching story of one
of these illiterate saints, named
Pambos. Being unable to read, he
came to some one to be taught a
psalm. Having learnt the single
verse, <q>I said I will take heed to
my ways, that I offend not with my
tongue,</q> he went away, saying that
was enough if it were practically
acquired. When asked, six months,
and again many years, after, why
he did not come to learn another
verse, he answered that he had
never been able truly to master
this. (<hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> iv. 23.)</note> of another, that having
discovered a few books in the cell of a brother hermit, he
reproached the student with having thus defrauded of their
property the widow and the orphan;<note place='foot'>Tillemont, x. p. 61.</note> of others, that their
only books were copies of the New Testament, which they
sold to relieve the poor.<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii. 490; Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>H.
E.</hi> iv. 23.</note>
</p>

<p>
With such men, living such a life, visions and miracles
were necessarily habitual. All the elements of hallucination
were there. Ignorant and superstitious, believing as a matter
of religious conviction that countless dæmons filled the air,
attributing every fluctuation of his temperament, and every
exceptional phenomenon in surrounding nature, to spiritual
agency; delirious, too, from solitude and long continued austerities,
the hermit soon mistook for palpable realities the
phantoms of his brain. In the ghastly gloom of the sepulchre,
where, amid mouldering corpses, he took up his abode;
in the long hours of the night of penance, when the desert
wind sobbed around his lonely cell, and the cries of wild
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
beasts were borne upon his ear, visible forms of lust or terror
appeared to haunt him, and strange dramas were enacted by
those who were contending for his soul. An imagination
strained to the utmost limit, acting upon a frame attenuated
and diseased by macerations, produced bewildering psychological
phenomena, paroxysms of conflicting passions, sudden
alternations of joy and anguish, which he regarded as manifestly
supernatural. Sometimes, in the very ecstasy of his
devotion, the memory of old scenes would crowd upon his
mind. The shady groves and soft voluptuous gardens of his
native city would arise, and, kneeling alone upon the burning
sand, he seemed to see around him the fair groups of dancing-girls,
on whose warm, undulating limbs and wanton smiles
his youthful eyes had too fondly dwelt. Sometimes his temptation
sprang from remembered sounds. The sweet, licentious
songs of other days came floating on his ear, and his
heart was thrilled with the passions of the past. And then
the scene would change. As his lips were murmuring the
psalter, his imagination, fired perhaps by the music of some
martial psalm, depicted the crowded amphitheatre. The
throng and passion and mingled cries of eager thousands were
present to his mind, and the fierce joy of the gladiators
passed through the tumult of his dream.<note place='foot'>I have combined in this passage
incidents from three distinct lives.
St. Jerome, in a very famous and
very beautiful passage of his letter
to Eustochium (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxii.) describes
the manner in which the forms of
dancing-girls appeared to surround
him as he knelt upon the desert
sands. St. Mary of Egypt (<hi rend='italic'>Vitæ
Patrum</hi>, ch. xix.) was especially
tortured by the recollection of the
songs she had sung when young,
which continually haunted her
mind. St. Hilarion (see his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi>
by St. Jerome) thought he saw a
gladiatorial show while he was repeating
the psalms. The manner
in which the different visions faded
into one another like dissolving
views is repeatedly described in the
biographies.</note> The simplest incident
came at last to suggest diabolical influence. An old
hermit, weary and fainting upon his journey, once thought
how refreshing would be a draught of the honey of wild bees
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
of the desert. At that moment his eye fell upon a rock on
which they had built a hive. He passed on with a shudder and
an exorcism, for he believed it to be a temptation of the
devil.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi>, ch. xi.
This saint was St. Helenus.</note> But most terrible of all were the struggles of young
and ardent men, through whose veins the hot blood of passion
continually flowed, physically incapable of a life of
celibacy, and with all that proneness to hallucination which
a southern sun engenders, who were borne on the wave of
enthusiasm to the desert life. In the arms of Syrian or
African brides, whose soft eyes answered love with love,
they might have sunk to rest, but in the lonely wilderness
no peace could ever visit their souls. The Lives of the
Saints paint with an appalling vividness the agonies of their
struggle. Multiplying with frantic energy the macerations
of the body, beating their breasts with anguish, the tears for
ever streaming from their eyes, imagining themselves continually
haunted by ever-changing forms of deadly beauty,
which acquired a greater vividness from the very passion
with which they resisted them, their struggles not unfrequently
ended in insanity and in suicide. It is related that
when St. Pachomius and St. Palæmon were conversing together
in the desert, a young monk, with his countenance
distracted with madness, rushed into their presence, and,
in a voice broken with convulsive sobs, poured out his tale
of sorrows. A woman, he said, had entered his cell, had
seduced him by her artifices, and then vanished miraculously
in the air, leaving him half dead upon the ground;&mdash;and
then with a wild shriek the monk broke away from the
saintly listeners. Impelled, as they imagined, by an evil
spirit, he rushed across the desert, till he arrived at the next
village, and there, leaping into the open furnace of the public
baths, he perished in the flames.<note place='foot'>Life of St. Pachomius (<hi rend='italic'>Vit.
Patrum</hi>), cap. ix.</note> Strange stories were told
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
among the monks of revulsions of passion even in the most
advanced. Of one monk especially, who had long been regarded
as a pattern of asceticism, but who had suffered himself
to fall into that self-complacency which was very common
among the anchorites, it was told that one evening a fainting
woman appeared at the door of his cell, and implored him to
give her shelter, and not permit her to be devoured by the wild
beasts. In an evil hour he yielded to her prayer. With all
the aspect of profound reverence she won his regards, and at
last ventured to lay her hand upon him. But that touch
convulsed his frame. Passions long slumbering and forgotten
rushed with impetuous fury through his veins. In
a paroxysm of fierce love, he sought to clasp the woman to
his heart, but she vanished from his sight, and a chorus of
dæmons, with peals of laughter, exulted over his fall. The
sequel of the story, as it is told by the monkish writer, is, I
think, of a very high order of artistic merit. The fallen hermit
did not seek, as might have been expected, by penance
and prayers to renew his purity. That moment of passion
and of shame had revealed in him a new nature, and severed
him irrevocably from the hopes and feelings of the ascetic
life. The fair form that had arisen upon his dream, though
he knew it to be a deception luring him to destruction, still
governed his heart. He fled from the desert, plunged anew
into the world, avoided all intercourse with the monks, and
followed the light of that ideal beauty even into the jaws
of hell.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi> cap. i.
This story was told to Rufinus by
St. John the hermit. The same
saint described his own visions very
graphically. <q>Denique etiam me
frequenter dæmones noctibus seduxerunt,
et neque orare neque requiescere
permiserunt, phantasias
quasdam per noctem totam sensibus
meis et cogitationes suggerentes.
Mane vero velut cum
quadam illusione prosternebant se
ante me dicentes, Indulge nobis,
abbas, quia laborem tibi incussimus
tota nocte.</q>&mdash;Ibid. St. Benedict
in the desert is said to have
been tortured by the recollection of
a beautiful girl he had once seen,
and only regained his composure
by rolling in thorns. (St. Greg.
<hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> ii. 2.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<p>
Anecdotes of this kind, circulated among the monks,
contributed to heighten the feelings of terror with which
they regarded all communication with the other sex. But
to avoid such communication was sometimes very difficult.
Few things are more striking, in the early historians of the
movement we are considering, than the manner in which
narratives of the deepest tragical interest alternate with extremely
whimsical accounts of the profound admiration with
which the female devotees regarded the most austere anchorites,
and the unwearied perseverance with which they
endeavoured to force themselves upon their notice. Some
women seem in this respect to have been peculiarly fortunate.
St. Melania, who devoted a great portion of her
fortune to the monks, accompanied by the historian Rufinus,
made, near the end of the fourth century, a long pilgrimage
through the Syrian and Egyptian hermitages.<note place='foot'>She lived also for some time
in a convent at Jerusalem, which
she had founded. Melania (who
was one of St. Jerome's friends)
was a lady of rank and fortune,
who devoted her property to the
monks. See her journey in Rosweyde,
lib. ii.</note> But with
many of the hermits it was a rule never to look upon the
face of any woman, and the number of years they had
escaped this contamination was commonly stated as a conspicuous
proof of their excellence. St. Basil would only
speak to a woman under extreme necessity.<note place='foot'>See his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> in Tillemont.</note> St. John of
Lycopolis had not seen a woman for forty-eight years.<note place='foot'>Ibid. x. p. 14. A certain
Didymus lived entirely alone till
his death, which took place when
he was ninety. (Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>
iv. 23.)</note> A
tribune was sent by his wife on a pilgrimage to St. John
the hermit to implore him to allow her to visit him, her
desire being so intense that she would probably, in the
opinion of her husband, die if it were ungratified. At last
the hermit told his suppliant that he would that night
visit his wife when she was in bed in her house. The
tribune brought this strange message to his wife, who
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
that night saw the hermit in a dream.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monachorum</hi>,
cap. i.</note> A young Roman
girl made a pilgrimage from Italy to Alexandria, to look
upon the face and obtain the prayers of St. Arsenius,
into whose presence she forced herself. Quailing beneath
his rebuffs, she flung herself at his feet, imploring him
with tears to grant her only request&mdash;to remember her,
and to pray for her. <q>Remember you!</q> cried the indignant
saint; <q>it shall be the prayer of my life that I may forget
you.</q> The poor girl sought consolation from the Archbishop
of Alexandria, who comforted her by assuring her that,
though she belonged to the sex by which dæmons commonly
tempt saints, he doubted not the hermit would pray for her
soul, though he would try to forget her face.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>, § 65.</note> Sometimes
this female enthusiasm took another and a more subtle form,
and on more than one occasion women were known to attire
themselves as men, and to pass their lives undisturbed as
anchorites. Among others, St. Pelagia, who had been the
most beautiful, and one of the most dangerously seductive
actresses of Antioch, having been somewhat strangely converted,
was appointed by the bishops to live in penance with
an elderly virgin of irreproachable piety; but, impelled, we
are told, by her desire for a more austere life, she fled from
her companion, assumed a male attire, took refuge among the
monks on the Mount of Olives, and, with something of the
skill of her old profession, supported her feigned character so
consistently that she acquired great renown, and it was only
(it is said) after her death that the saints discovered who had
been living among them.<note place='foot'>Pelagia was very pretty, and,
according to her own account, <q>her
sins were heavier than the sand.</q>
The people of Antioch, who were
very fond of her, called her Margarita,
or the pearl. <q>Il arriva un
jour que divers évesques, appelez
par celui d'Antioche pour quelques
affaires, estant ensemble à la porte
de l'eglise de S.-Julien, Pélagie
passa devant eux dans tout l'éclat
des pompes du diable, n'ayant pas
seulement une coeffe sur sa teste ni
un mouchoir sur ses épaules, ce
qu'on remarqua comme le comble de
son impudence. Tous les évesques
baissèrent les yeux en gémissant
pour ne pas voir ce dangereux objet
de péché, hors Nonne, très-saint
évesque d'Héliople, qui la regarda
avec une attention qui fit peine aux
autres.</q> However, this bishop immediately
began crying a great
deal, and reassured his brethren,
and a sermon which he preached
led to the conversion of the actress.
(Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém. d'Hist. ecclés.</hi> tome
xii. pp. 378-380. See, too, on
women, <q>under pretence of religion,
attiring themselves as men,</q> Sozomen,
iii. 14.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<p>
The foregoing anecdotes and observations will, I hope,
have given a sufficiently clear idea of the general nature of
the monastic life in its earliest phase, and also of the writings
it produced. We may now proceed to examine the ways in
which this mode of life affected both the ideal type and the
realised condition of Christian morals. And in the first
place, it is manifest that the proportion of virtues was
altered. If an impartial person were to glance over the
ethics of the New Testament, and were asked what was the
central and distinctive virtue to which the sacred writers
most continually referred, he would doubtless answer that it
was that which is described as love, charity, or philanthropy.
If he were to apply a similar scrutiny to the writings of the
fourth and fifth centuries, he would answer that the cardinal
virtue of the religious type was not love, but chastity. And
this chastity, which was regarded as the ideal state, was not
the purity of an undefiled marriage. It was the absolute
suppression of the whole sensual side of our nature. The
chief form of virtue, the central conception of the saintly
life, was a perpetual struggle against all carnal impulses, by
men who altogether refused the compromise of marriage.
From this fact, if I mistake not, some interesting and important
consequences may be deduced.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, religion gradually assumed a very
sombre hue. The business of the saint was to eradicate a
natural appetite, to attain a condition which was emphatically
abnormal. The depravity of human nature, especially
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
the essential evil of the body, was felt with a degree of
intensity that could never have been attained by moralists
who were occupied mainly with transient or exceptional
vices, such as envy, anger, or cruelty. And in addition to
the extreme inveteracy of the appetite which it was desired
to eradicate, it should be remembered that a somewhat luxurious
and indulgent life, even when that indulgence is not
itself distinctly evil, even when it has a tendency to mollify
the character, has naturally the effect of strengthening the
animal passions, and is therefore directly opposed to the
ascetic ideal. The consequence of this was first of all a
very deep sense of the habitual and innate depravity of
human nature; and, in the next place, a very strong association
of the idea of pleasure with that of vice. All this
necessarily flowed from the supreme value placed upon virginity.
The tone of calm and joyousness that characterises
Greek philosophy, the almost complete absence of all sense
of struggle and innate sin that it displays, is probably in a
very large degree to be ascribed to the fact that, in the department
of morals we are considering, Greek moralists made
no serious efforts to improve our nature, and Greek public
opinion acquiesced, without scandal, in an almost boundless
indulgence of illicit pleasures.
</p>

<p>
But while the great prominence at this time given to the
conflicts of the ascetic life threw a dark shade upon the
popular estimate of human nature, it contributed, I think,
very largely to sustain and deepen that strong conviction of
the freedom of the human will which the Catholic Church
has always so strenuously upheld; for there is, probably, no
other form of moral conflict in which men are so habitually
and so keenly sensible of that distinction between our will
and our desires, upon the reality of which all moral freedom
ultimately depends. It had also, I imagine, another result,
which it is difficult to describe with the same precision.
What may be called a strong animal nature&mdash;a nature, that
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
is, in which the passions are in vigorous, and at the same
time healthy, action&mdash;is that in which we should most naturally
expect to find several moral qualities. Good humour,
frankness, generosity, active courage, sanguine energy, buoyancy
of temper, are the usual and appropriate accompaniments
of a vigorous animal temperament, and they are much
more rarely found either in natures that are essentially
feeble and effeminate, or in natures which have been artificially
emasculated by penances, distorted from their original
tendency, and habitually held under severe control. The
ideal type of Catholicism being, on account of the supreme
value placed upon virginity, of the latter kind, the qualities
I have mentioned have always ranked very low in the
Catholic conceptions of excellence, and the steady tendency
of Protestant and industrial civilisation has been to elevate
them.
</p>

<p>
I do not know whether the reader will regard these
speculations&mdash;which I advance with some diffidence&mdash;as far-fetched
and fanciful. Our knowledge of the physical antecedents
of different moral qualities is so scanty that it is
difficult to speak on these matters with much confidence;
but few persons, I think, can have failed to observe that the
physical temperaments I have described differ not simply in
the one great fact of the intensity of the animal passions, but
also in the aptitude of each to produce a distinct moral type,
or, in other words, in the harmony of each with several
qualities, both good and evil. A doctrine, therefore, which
connects one of these two temperaments indissolubly with the
moral ideal, affects the appreciation of a large number of
moral qualities. But whatever may be thought of the moral
results springing from the physical temperament which asceticism
produced, there can be little controversy as to the
effects springing from the condition of life which it enjoined.
Severance from the interests and affections of all around him
was the chief object of the anchorite, and the first consequence
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
of the prominence of asceticism was a profound discredit
thrown upon the domestic virtues.
</p>

<p>
The extent to which this discredit was carried, the
intense hardness of heart and ingratitude manifested by the
saints towards those who were bound to them by the closest
of earthly ties, is known to few who have not studied the
original literature on the subject. These things are commonly
thrown into the shade by those modern sentimentalists who
delight in idealising the devotees of the past. To break by
his ingratitude the heart of the mother who had borne him,
to persuade the wife who adored him that it was her duty to
separate from him for ever, to abandon his children, uncared
for and beggars, to the mercies of the world, was regarded by
the true hermit as the most acceptable offering he could make
to his God. His business was to save his own soul. The
serenity of his devotion would be impaired by the discharge
of the simplest duties to his family. Evagrius, when a
hermit in the desert, received, after a long interval, letters
from his father and mother. He could not bear that the
equable tenor of his thoughts should be disturbed by the
recollection of those who loved him, so he cast the letters
unread into the fire.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, tome x. pp. 376,
377. Apart from family affections,
there are some curious instances
recorded of the anxiety of the
saints to avoid distractions. One
monk used to cover his face when
he went into his garden, lest the
sight of the trees should disturb
his mind. (<hi rend='italic'>Verb. Seniorum.</hi>) St.
Arsenius could not bear the rustling
of the reeds (ibid.); and a
saint named Boniface struck dead
a man who went about with an ape
and a cymbal, because he had (apparently
quite unintentionally) disturbed
him at his prayers. (St.
Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> i. 9.)</note> A man named Mutius, accompanied
by his only child, a little boy of eight years old, abandoned
his possessions and demanded admission into a
monastery. The monks received him, but they proceeded to
discipline his heart. <q>He had already forgotten that he was
rich; he must next be taught to forget that he was a father.</q><note place='foot'><q>Quemadmodum se jam divitem
non esse sciebat, ita etiam
patrem se esse nesciret.</q>&mdash;Cassian,
<hi rend='italic'>De Cœnobiorum Institutis</hi>, iv. 27.</note>
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
His little child was separated from him, clothed in dirty rags,
subjected to every form of gross and wanton hardship, beaten,
spurned, and ill treated. Day after day the father was compelled
to look upon his boy wasting away with sorrow, his
once happy countenance for ever stained with tears, distorted
by sobs of anguish. But yet, says the admiring biographer,
<q>though he saw this day by day, such was his love for Christ,
and for the virtue of obedience, that the father's heart was
rigid and unmoved. He thought little of the tears of his
child. He was anxious only for his own humility and
perfection in virtue.</q><note place='foot'><q>Cumque taliter infans sub
oculis ejus per dies singulos ageretur,
pro amore nihilominus
Christi et obedientiæ virtute, rigida
semper atque immobilia patris
viscera permanserunt ... parum
cogitans de lacrymis ejus, sed de
propria humilitate ac perfectione
sollicitus.</q>&mdash;Ibid.</note> At last the abbot told him to take
his child and throw it into the river. He proceeded, without
a murmur or apparent pang, to obey, and it was only at the
last moment that the monks interposed, and on the very
brink of the river saved the child. Mutius afterwards rose
to a high position among the ascetics, and was justly regarded
as having displayed in great perfection the temper of a saint.<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
An inhabitant of Thebes once came to the abbot Sisoes, and
asked to be made a monk. The abbot asked if he had any one
belonging to him. He answered, <q>A son.</q> <q>Take your son,</q>
rejoined the old man, <q>and throw him into the river, and then
you may become a monk.</q> The father hastened to fulfil the
command, and the deed was almost consummated when a
messenger sent by Sisoes revoked the order.<note place='foot'>Bollandists, July 6; <hi rend='italic'>Verba
Seniorum</hi>, xiv.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the same lesson was taught under the form of
a miracle. A man had once deserted his three children to
become a monk. Three years after, he determined to bring
them into the monastery, but, on returning to his home,
found that the two eldest had died during his absence. He
came to his abbot, bearing in his arms his youngest child,
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
who was still little more than an infant. The abbot turned
to him and said, <q>Do you love this child?</q> The father
answered, <q>Yes.</q> Again the abbot said, <q>Do you love it
dearly?</q> The father answered as before. <q>Then take the
child,</q> said the abbot, <q>and throw it into the fire upon yonder
hearth.</q> The father did as he was commanded, and the child
remained unharmed amid the flames.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>, xiv.</note> But it was especially
in their dealings with their female relations that this aspect
of the monastic character was vividly displayed. In this
case the motive was not simply to mortify family affections&mdash;it
was also to guard against the possible danger resulting
from the presence of a woman. The fine flower of that
saintly purity might have been disturbed by the sight of a
mother's or a sister's face. The ideal of one age appears
sometimes too grotesque for the caricature of another; and it
is curious to observe how pale and weak is the picture
which Molière drew of the affected prudery of Tartuffe,<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='smallcaps'>Tartuffe</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>tirant un mouchoir<lb/>
de sa poche</hi>).
</p>
<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ah, mon Dieu, je vous prie,<lb/>
Avant que de parler, prenez-moi ce mouchoir.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dorine.</hi>
</p>
<p>
Comment!
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tartuffe.</hi>
</p>
<p>
<q rend='post'>Couvrez ce sein que je ne saurois voir;<lb/>
Par de pareils objets des âmes sont blessées,<lb/>
Et cela fait venir de coupables pensées.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Tartuffe</hi>, Acte iii. scène 2.
</p></note>
when compared with the narratives that are gravely propounded
in the Lives of the Saints. When the abbot Sisoes
had become a very old, feeble, and decrepit man, his disciples
exhorted him to leave the desert for an inhabited country.
Sisoes seemed to yield; but he stipulated, as a necessary
condition, that in his new abode he should never be compelled
to encounter the peril and perturbation of looking on
a woman's face. To such a nature, of course, the desert alone
was suitable, and the old man was suffered to die in peace.<note place='foot'>Bollandists, July 6.</note>
A monk was once travelling with his mother&mdash;in itself a
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
most unusual circumstance&mdash;and, having arrived at a bridgeless
stream, it became necessary for him to carry her across.
To her surprise, he began carefully wrapping up his hands
in cloths; and upon her asking the reason, he explained that
he was alarmed lest he should be unfortunate enough to
touch her, and thereby disturb the equilibrium of his nature.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>, iv. The
poor woman, being startled and
perplexed at the proceedings of her
son, said, <q>Quid sic operuisti manus
tuas, fili? Ille autem dixit: Quia
corpus mulieris ignis est, et ex eo
ipso quo te contingebam veniebat
mihi commemoratio aliarum feminarum
in animo.</q></note>
The sister of St. John of Calama loved him dearly, and
earnestly implored him that she might look upon his face
once more before she died. On his persistent refusal, she
declared that she would make a pilgrimage to him in the
desert. The alarmed and perplexed saint at last wrote
to her, promising to visit her if she would engage to relinquish
her design. He went to her in disguise, received a
cup of water from her hands, and came away without being
discovered. She wrote to him, reproaching him with not
having fulfilled his promise. He answered her that he
had indeed visited her, that <q>by the mercy of Jesus
Christ he had not been recognised,</q> and that she must
never see him again.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém. de l'Hist.
ecclés.</hi> tome x. pp. 444, 445.</note> The mother of St. Theodorus came
armed with letters from the bishops to see her son, but
he implored his abbot, St. Pachomius, to permit him to
decline the interview; and, finding all her efforts in vain,
the poor woman retired into a convent, together with her
daughter, who had made a similar expedition with similar
results.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vit. S. Pachomius</hi>, ch. xxxi.;
<hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>.</note> The mother of St. Marcus persuaded his abbot to
command the saint to go out to her. Placed in a dilemma
between the sin of disobedience and the perils of seeing his
mother, St. Marcus extricated himself by an ingenious device.
He went to his mother with his face disguised and his eyes
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
shut. The mother did not recognise her son. The son did
not see his mother.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Senorium</hi>, xiv.</note> The sister of St. Pior in like manner
induced the abbot of that saint to command him to admit her
to his presence. The command was obeyed, but St. Pior
resolutely kept his eyes shut during the interview.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> cap.
lxxxvii.</note> St.
Pœmen and his six brothers had all deserted their mother to
cultivate the perfections of an ascetic life. But ingratitude
can seldom quench the love of a mother's heart, and the
old woman, now bent by infirmities, went alone into the
Egyptian desert to see once more the children she so dearly
loved. She caught sight of them as they were about to leave
their cell for the church, but they immediately ran back into
the cell, and, before her tottering steps could reach it, one
of her sons rushed forward and closed the door in her face.
She remained outside weeping bitterly. St. Pœmen then,
coming to the door, but without opening it, said, <q>Why do
you, who are already stricken with age, pour forth such cries
and lamentations?</q> But she, recognising the voice of her
son, answered, <q>It is because I long to see you, my sons.
What harm could it do you that I should see you? Am I
not your mother? did I not give you suck? I am now an old
and wrinkled woman, and my heart is troubled at the sound
of your voices.</q><note place='foot'>Bollandists, June 6. I avail
myself again of the version of
Tillemont. <q>Lorsque S. Pemen demeuroit
en Egypte avec ses frères,
leur mère, qui avoit un extrême
désir de les voir, venoit souvent au
lieu où ils estoient, sans pouvoir
jamais avoir cette satisfaction. Une
fois enfin elle prit si bien son temps
qu'elle les rencontra qui alloient à
l'église, mais dès qu'ils la virent ils
s'en retournèrent en haste dans
leur cellule et fermèrent la porte
sur eux. Elle les suivit, et trouvant
la porte, elle les appeloit avec
des larmes et des cris capables de
les toucher de compassion....
Pemen s'y leva et s'y en alla, et
l'entendant pleurer il luy dit, tenant
toujours la porte fermée, <q>Pourquoi
vous lassez-vous inutilement à
pleurer et crier? N'êtes-vous pas
déjà assez abattue par la vieillesse?</q>
Elle reconnut la voix de Pemen, et
s'efforçant encore davantage, elle
s'écria, <q>Hé, mes enfans, c'est que
je voudrais bien vous voir: et
quel mal y a-t-il que je vous voie?
Ne suis-je pas votre mère, et ne
vous ai-je pas nourri du lait de mes
mammelles? Je suis déjà toute
pleine de rides, et lorsque je vous
ay entendu, l'extrême envie que
j'ay de vous voir m'a tellement
émue que je suis presque tombée
en défaillance.</q></q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Mémoires de
l'Hist. ecclès.</hi> tome xv. pp. 157,
158.</note> The saintly brothers, however, refused to
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
open their door. They told their mother that she would see
them after death; and the biographer says she at last went
away contented with the prospect. St. Simeon Stylites, in
this as in other respects, stands in the first line. He had
been passionately loved by his parents, and, if we may believe
his eulogist and biographer, he began his saintly career by
breaking the heart of his father, who died of grief at his
flight. His mother, however, lingered on. Twenty-seven
years after his disappearance, at a period when his austerities
had made him famous, she heard for the first time where he
was, and hastened to visit him. But all her labour was in
vain. No woman was admitted within the precincts of his
dwelling, and he refused to permit her even to look upon his
face. Her entreaties and tears were mingled with words of
bitter and eloquent reproach.<note place='foot'>The original is much more eloquent
than my translation. <q>Fili,
quare hoc fecisti? Pro utero quo
te portavi, satiasti me luctu, pro
lactatione qua te lactavi dedisti
mihi lacrymas, pro osculo quo te
osculata sum, dedisti mihi amaras
cordis angustias; pro dolore et
labore quem passa sum, imposuisti
mihi sævissimas plagas.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Vita
Simeonis</hi> (in Rosweyde).</note> <q>My son,</q> she is represented
as having said, <q>why have you done this? I bore you in my
womb, and you have wrung my soul with grief. I gave you
milk from my breast, you have filled my eyes with tears.
For the kisses I gave you, you have given me the anguish of
a broken heart; for all that I have done and suffered for you,
you have repaid me by the most cruel wrongs.</q> At last the
saint sent a message to tell her that she would soon see him.
Three days and three nights she had wept and entreated in
vain, and now, exhausted with grief and age and privation,
she sank feebly to the ground and breathed her last sigh before
that inhospitable door. Then for the first time the saint,
accompanied by his followers, came out. He shed some pious
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
tears over the corpse of his murdered mother, and offered up
a prayer consigning her soul to heaven. Perhaps it was but
fancy, perhaps life was not yet wholly extinct, perhaps the
story is but the invention of the biographer; but a faint
motion&mdash;which appears to have been regarded as miraculous&mdash;is
said to have passed over her prostrate form. Simeon
once more commended her soul to heaven, and then, amid the
admiring murmurs of his disciples, the saintly matricide
returned to his devotions.
</p>

<p>
The glaring mendacity that characterises the Lives of the
Catholic Saints, probably to a greater extent than any other
important branch of existing literature, makes it not unreasonable
to hope that many of the foregoing anecdotes represent
much less events that actually took place than ideal pictures
generated by the enthusiasm of the chroniclers. They are
not, however, on that account the less significant of the moral
conceptions which the ascetic period had created. The ablest
men in the Christian community vied with one another in
inculcating as the highest form of duty the abandonment of
social ties and the mortification of domestic affections. A
few faint restrictions were indeed occasionally made. Much&mdash;on
which I shall hereafter touch&mdash;was written on the
liberty of husbands and wives deserting one another; and
something was written on the cases of children forsaking or
abandoning their parents. At first, those who, when children,
were devoted to the monasteries by their parents, without
their own consent, were permitted, when of mature age, to
return to the world; and this liberty was taken from them
for the first time by the fourth Council of Toledo, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 633.<note place='foot'>Bingham, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, book vii. ch. iii.</note>
The Council of Gangra condemned the heretic Eustathius for
teaching that children might, through religious motives, forsake
their parents, and St. Basil wrote in the same strain;<note place='foot'>Ibid.</note>
but cases of this kind of rebellion against parental authority
were continually recounted with admiration in the Lives of the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
Saints, applauded by some of the leading Fathers, and virtually
sanctioned by a law of Justinian, which deprived parents of
the power of either restraining their children from entering
monasteries, or disinheriting them if they had done so without
their consent.<note place='foot'>Bingham, <hi rend='italic'>Antiquities</hi>, book
vii. chap. 3.</note> St. Chrysostom relates with enthusiasm the
case of a young man who had been designed by his father for
the army, and who was lured away to a monastery.<note place='foot'>Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Early Christianity</hi>
(ed. 1867), vol. iii. p. 122.</note> The
eloquence of St. Ambrose is said to have been so seductive,
that mothers were accustomed to shut up their daughters to
guard them against his fascinations.<note place='foot'>Ibid. vol. iii. p. 153.</note> The position of affectionate
parents was at this time extremely painful. The
touching language is still preserved, in which the mother of
Chrysostom&mdash;who had a distinguished part in the conversion
of her son&mdash;implored him, if he thought it his duty to fly to
the desert life, at least to postpone the act till she had died.<note place='foot'>Ibid. vol. iii. p. 120.</note>
St. Ambrose devoted a chapter to proving that, while those
are worthy of commendation who enter the monasteries
with the approbation, those are still more worthy of praise
who do so against the wishes, of their parents; and he proceeded
to show how small were the penalties the latter could
inflict when compared with the blessings asceticism could
bestow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Virginibus</hi>, i. 11.</note> Even before the law of Justinian, the invectives of
the clergy were directed against those who endeavoured to
prevent their children flying to the desert. St. Chrysostom
explained to them that they would certainly be damned.<note place='foot'>See Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Early Christianity</hi>,
vol. iii. p. 121.</note> St.
Ambrose showed that, even in this world, they might not be
unpunished. A girl, he tells us, had resolved to enter into a
convent, and as her relations were expostulating with her on
her intention, one of those present tried to move her by the
memory of her dead father, asking whether, if he were still
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
alive, he would have suffered her to remain unmarried.
<q>Perhaps,</q> she calmly answered, <q>it was for this very purpose
he died, that he should not throw any obstacle in my way.</q>
Her words were more than an answer; they were an oracle.
The indiscreet questioner almost immediately died, and the
relations, shocked by the manifest providence, desisted from
their opposition, and even implored the young saint to accomplish
her design.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Virginibus</hi>, i. 11.</note> St. Jerome tells with rapturous enthusiasm
of a little girl, named Asella, who, when only twelve years
old, devoted herself to the religious life and refused to look
on the face of any man, and whose knees, by constant prayer,
became at last like those of a camel.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> xxiv.</note> A famous widow,
named Paula, upon the death of her husband, deserted her
family, listened with <q>dry eyes</q> to her children, who were
imploring her to stay, fled to the society of the monks at
Jerusalem, made it her desire that <q>she might die a beggar,
and leave not one piece of money to her son,</q> and, having dissipated
the whole of her fortune in charities, bequeathed to
her children only the embarrassment of her debts.<note place='foot'>St. Jerome describes the scene
at her departure with admiring
eloquence. <q>Descendit ad portum
fratre, cognatis, affinibus et quod
majus est liberis prosequentibus,
et elementissimam matrem pietate
vincere cupientibus. Jam carbasa
tendebantur, et remorum ductu
navis in altum protrahebatur.
Parvus Toxotius supplices manus
tendebat in littore, Ruffina jam
nubilis ut suas expectaret nuptias
tacens fletibus obsecrabat. Et
tamen illa siccos tendebat ad cælum
oculos, pietatem in filios pietate in
Deum superans. Nesciebat se
matrem ut Christi probaret ancillam.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
cviii. In another place
he says of her: <q>Testis est Jesus,
ne unum quidem nummum ab ea
filiæ derelictum sed, ut ante jam
dixi, derelictum magnum æs alienum.</q>&mdash;Ibid.
And again: <q>Vis,
lector, ejus breviter scire virtutes?
Omnes suos pauperes, pauperior
ipsa dimisit.</q>&mdash;Ibid.</note> It was
carefully inculcated that all money given or bequeathed to the
poor, or to the monks, produced spiritual benefit to the donors
or testators, but that no spiritual benefit sprang from money
bestowed upon relations; and the more pious minds recoiled
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
from disposing of their property in a manner that would not
redound to the advantage of their souls. Sometimes parents
made it a dying request to their children that they would
preserve none of their property, but would bestow it all
among the poor.<note place='foot'>See Chastel, <hi rend='italic'>Etudes historiques
sur la Charité</hi>, p. 231. The parents
of St. Gregory Nazianzen had made
this request, which was faithfully
observed.</note> It was one of the most honourable incidents
of the life of St. Augustine, that he, like Aurelius,
Bishop of Carthage, refused to receive legacies or donations
which unjustly spoliated the relatives of the benefactor.<note place='foot'>Chastel, p. 232.</note>
Usually, however, to outrage the affections of the nearest and
dearest relations was not only regarded as innocent, but proposed
as the highest virtue. <q>A young man,</q> it was acutely
said, <q>who has learnt to despise a mother's grief, will easily
bear any other labour that is imposed upon him.</q><note place='foot'>See a characteristic passage
from the <hi rend='italic'>Life of St. Fulgentius</hi>,
quoted by Dean Milman. <q>Facile
potest juvenis tolerare quemcunque
imposuerit laborem qui poterit
maternum jam despicere dolorem.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
of Latin Christianity</hi>, vol.
ii. p. 82.</note> St.
Jerome, when exhorting Heliodorus to desert his family and
become a hermit, expatiated with a fond minuteness on every
form of natural affection he desired him to violate. <q>Though
your little nephew twine his arms around your neck; though
your mother, with dishevelled hair and tearing her robe asunder,
point to the breast with which she suckled you; though
your father fall down on the threshold before you, pass on
over your father's body. Fly with tearless eyes to the banner
of the cross. In this matter cruelty is the only piety....
Your widowed sister may throw her gentle arms around
you.... Your father may implore you to wait but a short
time to bury those near to you, who will soon be no more;
your weeping mother may recall your childish days, and may
point to her shrunken breast and to her wrinkled brow.
Those around you may tell you that all the household rests
upon you. Such chains as these, the love of God and the
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
fear of hell can easily break. You say that Scripture orders
you to obey your parents, but he who loves them more than
Christ loses his soul. The enemy brandishes a sword to slay
me. Shall I think of a mother's tears?</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xiv. (<hi rend='italic'>Ad Heliodorum</hi>).</note>
</p>

<p>
The sentiment manifested in these cases continued to be
displayed in later ages. Thus, St. Gregory the Great assures
us that a certain young boy, though he had enrolled
himself as a monk, was unable to repress his love for his
parents, and one night stole out secretly to visit them. But
the judgment of God soon marked the enormity of the offence.
On coming back to the monastery, he died that very day, and
when he was buried, the earth refused to receive so heinous a
criminal. His body was repeatedly thrown up from the
grave, and it was only suffered to rest in peace when St.
Benedict had laid the Sacrament upon its breast.<note place='foot'>St. Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> ii. 24.</note> One nun
revealed, it is said, after death, that she had been condemned
for three days to the fires of purgatory, because she had loved
her mother too much.<note place='foot'>Bollandists, May 3 (vol. vii.
p. 561).</note> Of another saint it is recorded that
his benevolence was such that he was never known to be
hard or inhuman to any one except his relations.<note place='foot'><q>Hospitibus omni loco ac tempore
liberalissimus fuit.... Solis
consanguineis durus erat et inhumanus,
tamquam ignotos illos respiciens.</q>&mdash;Bollandists,
May 29.</note> St.
Romuald, the founder of the Camaldolites, counted his father
among his spiritual children, and on one occasion punished
him by flagellation.<note place='foot'>See Helyot, <hi rend='italic'>Dict. des Ordres
religieux</hi>, art. <q>Camaldules.</q></note> The first nun whom St. Francis of
Assisi enrolled was a beautiful girl of Assisi named Clara
Scifi, with whom he had for some time carried on a clandestine
correspondence, and whose flight from her father's home
he both counselled and planned.<note place='foot'>See the charming sketch in the
<hi rend='italic'>Life of St. Francis</hi>, by Hase.</note> As the first enthusiasm
of asceticism died away, what was lost in influence by
the father was gained by the priest. The confessional made
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
this personage the confidant in the most delicate secrets of
domestic life. The supremacy of authority, of sympathy, and
sometimes even of affection, passed away beyond the domestic
circle, and, by establishing an absolute authority over the
most secret thoughts and feelings of nervous and credulous
women, the priests laid the foundation of the empire of
the world.
</p>

<p>
The picture I have drawn of the inroads made in the first
period of asceticism upon the domestic affections, tells, I
think, its own story, and I shall only add a very few words
of comment. That it is necessary for many men who are
pursuing a truly heroic course to break loose from the trammels
which those about them would cast over their actions
or their opinions, and that this severance often constitutes
at once one of the noblest and one of the most painful
incidents in their career, are unquestionable truths; but
the examples of such occasional and exceptional sacrifices,
endured for some great unselfish end, cannot be compared
with the conduct of those who regarded the mortification of
domestic love as in itself a form of virtue, and whose ends
were mainly or exclusively selfish. The sufferings endured
by the ascetic who fled from his relations were often, no
doubt, very great. Many anecdotes remain to show that
warm and affectionate hearts sometimes beat under the cold
exterior of the monk;<note place='foot'>The legend of St. Scholastica,
the sister of St. Benedict, has been
often quoted. He had visited her,
and was about to leave in the evening,
when she implored him to stay.
He refused, and she then prayed to
God, who sent so violent a tempest
that the saint was unable to depart.
(St. Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> ii. 33.)
Cassian speaks of a monk who
thought it his duty never to see
his mother, but who laboured for a
whole year to pay off a debt she
had incurred. (Cœnob. <hi rend='italic'>Inst.</hi> v. 38.)
St. Jerome mentions the strong
natural affection of Paula, though
she considered it a virtue to mortify
it. (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cviii.)</note> and St. Jerome, in one of his letters,
remarked, with much complacency and congratulation, that
the very bitterest pang of captivity is simply this irrevocable
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
separation which the superstition he preached induced multitudes
to inflict upon themselves. But if, putting aside the
intrinsic excellence of an act, we attempt to estimate the
nobility of the agent, we must consider not only the cost of
what he did, but also the motive which induced him to do it.
It is this last consideration which renders it impossible for us
to place the heroism of the ascetic on the same level with that
of the great patriots of Greece or Rome. A man may be as
truly selfish about the next world as about this. Where an
overpowering dread of future torments, or an intense realisation
of future happiness, is the leading motive of action, the
theological virtue of faith may be present, but the ennobling
quality of disinterestedness is assuredly absent. In our day,
when pictures of rewards and punishments beyond the grave
act but feebly upon the imagination, a religious motive is
commonly an unselfish motive; but it has not always been
so, and it was undoubtedly not so in the first period of asceticism.
The terrors of a future judgment drove the monk
into the desert, and the whole tenor of the ascetic life, while
isolating him from human sympathies, fostered an intense,
though it may be termed a religious, selfishness.
</p>

<p>
The effect of the mortification of the domestic affections
upon the general character was probably very pernicious.
The family circle is the appointed sphere, not only for the
performance of manifest duties, but also for the cultivation
of the affections; and the extreme ferocity which so often
characterised the ascetic was the natural consequence of the
discipline he imposed upon himself. Severed from all other
ties, the monks clung with a desperate tenacity to their
opinions and to their Church, and hated those who dissented
from them with all the intensity of men whose whole lives
were concentrated on a single subject, whose ignorance and
bigotry prevented them from conceiving the possibility of
any good thing in opposition to themselves, and who had
made it a main object of their discipline to eradicate all
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
natural sympathies and affections. We may reasonably attribute
to the fierce biographer the words of burning hatred of
all heretics which St. Athanasius puts in the mouth of the
dying patriarch of the hermits;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Life of Antony.</hi> See, too, the sentiments of St. Pachomius, <hi rend='italic'>Vit.</hi>
cap. xxvii.</note> but ecclesiastical history,
and especially the writings of the later Pagans, abundantly
prove that the sentiment was a general one. To the Christian
bishops it is mainly due that the wide and general,
though not perfect, recognition of religious liberty in the
Roman legislation was replaced by laws of the most minute
and stringent intolerance. To the monks, acting as the executive
of an omnipresent, intolerant, and aggressive clergy,
is due an administrative change, perhaps even more important
than the legislative change that had preceded it. The
system of conniving at, neglecting, or despising forms of
worship that were formally prohibited, which had been so
largely practised by the sceptical Pagans, and under the lax
police system of the Empire, and which is so important a fact
in the history of the rise of Christianity, was absolutely destroyed.
Wandering in bands through the country, the
monks were accustomed to burn the temples, to break the
idols, to overthrow the altars, to engage in fierce conflicts
with the peasants, who often defended with desperate courage
the shrines of their gods. It would be impossible to conceive
men more fitted for the task. Their fierce fanaticism, their
persuasion that every idol was tenanted by a literal dæmon,
and their belief that death incurred in this iconoclastic
crusade was a form of martyrdom, made them careless of all
consequences to themselves, while the reverence that attached
to their profession rendered it scarcely possible for the civil
power to arrest them. Men who had learnt to look with indifference
on the tears of a broken-hearted mother, and whose
ideal was indissolubly connected with the degradation of the
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
body, were but little likely to be moved either by the pathos
of old associations, and of reverent, though mistaken, worship,
or by the grandeur of the Serapeum, or of the noble statues of
Phidias and Praxiteles. Sometimes the civil power ordered
the reconstruction of Jewish synagogues or heretical churches
which had been illegally destroyed; but the doctrine was
early maintained that such a reconstruction was a deadly sin.
Under Julian some Christians suffered martyrdom sooner
than be parties to it; and St. Ambrose from the pulpit
of Milan, and Simeon Stylites from his desert pillar, united
in denouncing Theodosius, who had been guilty of issuing
this command.
</p>

<p>
Another very important moral result to which asceticism
largely contributed was the depression and sometimes almost
the extinction of the civic virtues. A candid examination
will show that the Christian civilisations have been as inferior
to the Pagan ones in civic and intellectual virtues as they
have been superior to them in the virtues of humanity and
of chastity. We have already seen that one remarkable feature
of the intellectual movement that preceded Christianity
was the gradual decadence of patriotism. In the early days
both of Greece and Rome, the first duty enforced was that of
a man to his country. This was the rudimentary or cardinal
virtue of the moral type. It gave the tone to the whole
system of ethics, and different moral qualities were valued
chiefly in proportion to their tendency to form illustrious
citizens. The destruction of this spirit in the Roman Empire
was due, as we have seen, to two causes&mdash;one of them being
political and the other intellectual. The political cause
was the amalgamation of the different nations in one great
despotism, which gave indeed an ample field for personal
and intellectual freedom, but extinguished the sentiment
of nationality and closed almost every sphere of political
activity. The intellectual cause, which was by no means
unconnected with the political one, was the growing ascendancy
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
of Oriental philosophies, which dethroned the active
Stoicism of the early Empire, and placed its ideal of excellence
in contemplative virtues and in elaborate purifications.
By this decline of the patriotic sentiment the
progress of the new faith was greatly aided. In all matters
of religion the opinions of men are governed much more by
their sympathies than by their judgments; and it rarely or
never happens that a religion which is opposed to a strong
national sentiment, as Christianity was in Judea, as Catholicism
and Episcopalian Protestantism have been in Scotland,
and as Anglicanism is even now in Ireland, can win the acceptance
of the people.
</p>

<p>
The relations of Christianity to the sentiment of patriotism
were from the first very unfortunate. While the Christians
were, for obvious reasons, completely separated from
the national spirit of Judea, they found themselves equally
at variance with the lingering remnants of Roman patriotism.
Rome was to them the power of Antichrist, and its
overthrow the necessary prelude to the millennial reign.
They formed an illegal organisation, directly opposed to the
genius of the Empire, anticipating its speedy destruction,
looking back with something more than despondency to
the fate of the heroes who adorned its past, and refusing
resolutely to participate in those national spectacles which
were the symbols and the expressions of patriotic feeling.
Though scrupulously averse to all rebellion, they rarely concealed
their sentiments, and the whole tendency of their
teaching was to withdraw men as far as possible both from
the functions and the enthusiasm of public life. It was at
once their confession and their boast, that no interests were
more indifferent to them than those of their country.<note place='foot'><q>Nec ulla res aliena magis quam publica.</q>&mdash;Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi>
ch. xxxviii.</note> They
regarded the lawfulness of taking arms as very questionable,
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
and all those proud and aspiring qualities that constitute the
distinctive beauty of the soldier's character as emphatically
unchristian. Their home and their interests were in another
world, and, provided only they were unmolested in their
worship, they avowed with frankness, long after the Empire
had become Christian, that it was a matter of indifference to
them under what rule they lived.<note place='foot'><q>Quid interest sub cujus imperio
vivat homo moriturus, si illi
qui imperant, ad impia et iniqua
non cogant.</q>&mdash;St. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>De Civ. Dei</hi>,
v. 17.</note> Asceticism, drawing all
the enthusiasm of Christendom to the desert life, and elevating
as an ideal the extreme and absolute abnegation of
all patriotism,<note place='foot'>St. Jerome declares that
<q>Monachum in patria sua perfectum
esse non posse, perfectum
autem esse nolle delinquere est.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
xiv. Dean Milman well
says of a later period: <q>According
to the monastic view of Christianity,
the total abandonment
of the world, with all its ties and
duties, as well as its treasures, its
enjoyments, and objects of ambition,
advanced rather than diminished
the hopes of salvation.
Why should they fight for a perishing
world, from which it was better
to be estranged?... It is singular,
indeed, that while we have seen
the Eastern monks turned into
fierce undisciplined soldiers, perilling
their own lives and shedding
the blood of others without remorse,
in assertion of some shadowy
shade of orthodox expression,
hardly anywhere do we find them
asserting their liberties or their
religion with intrepid resistance.
Hatred of heresy was a more stirring
motive than the dread or the
danger of Islamism. After the
first defeats the Christian mind
was still further prostrated by the
common notion that the invasion
was a just and heaven-commissioned
visitation; ... resistance
a vain, almost an impious struggle
to avert inevitable punishment.</q>&mdash;Milman's
<hi rend='italic'>Latin Christianity</hi>, vol.
ii. p. 206. Compare Massillon's
famous <hi rend='italic'>Discours au Régiment de
Catinat</hi>:&mdash;<q>Ce qu'il y a ici de plus
déplorable, c'est que dans une vie
rude et pénible, dans des emplois
dont les devoirs passent quelquefois
la rigueur des cloîtres les plus
austères, vous souffrez toujours en
vain pour l'autre vie.... Dix ans
de services ont plus usé votre corps
qu'une vie entière de pénitence ...
un seul jour de ces souffrances,
consacré au Seigneur, vous aurait
peut-être valu un bonheur éternel.</q></note> formed the culmination of the movement,
and was undoubtedly one cause of the downfall of the
Roman Empire.
</p>

<p>
There are, probably, few subjects on which popular judgments
are commonly more erroneous than upon the relations
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
between positive religions and moral enthusiasm. Religions
have, no doubt, a most real power of evoking a latent energy
which, without their existence, would never have been called
into action; but their influence is on the whole probably
more attractive than creative. They supply the channel in
which moral enthusiasm flows, the banner under which it
is enlisted, the mould in which it is cast, the ideal to which
it tends. The first idea which the phrase <q>a very good man</q>
would have suggested to an early Roman would probably have
been that of great and distinguished patriotism, and the passion
and interest of such a man in his country's cause were in
direct proportion to his moral elevation. Ascetic Christianity
decisively diverted moral enthusiasm into another channel,
and the civic virtues, in consequence, necessarily declined.
The extinction of all public spirit, the base treachery and
corruption pervading every department of the Government,
the cowardice of the army, the despicable frivolity of character
that led the people of Treves, when fresh from their burning
city, to call for theatres and circuses, and the people of Roman
Carthage to plunge wildly into the excitement of the chariot
races, on the very day when their city succumbed beneath
the Vandal;<note place='foot'>See a very striking passage in
Salvian, <hi rend='italic'>De Gubern. Div.</hi> lib. vi.</note> all these things coexisted with extraordinary
displays of ascetic and of missionary devotion. The genius
and the virtue that might have defended the Empire were engaged
in fierce disputes about the Pelagian controversy, at the
very time when Alaric was encircling Rome with his armies,<note place='foot'>Chateaubriand very truly
says, <q>qu'Orose et saint Augustin
étoient plus occupés du schisme de
Pélage que de la désolation de
l'Afrique et des Gaules.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Études
histor.</hi> vi<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> discours, 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>de</hi> partie.
The remark might certainly be
extended much further.</note>
and there was no subtlety of theological metaphysics which
did not kindle a deeper interest in the Christian leaders than
the throes of their expiring country. The moral enthusiasm
that in other days would have fired the armies of Rome with
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
an invincible valour, impelled thousands to abandon their
country and their homes, and consume the weary hours in a
long routine of useless and horrible macerations. When the
Goths had captured Rome, St. Augustine, as we have seen,
pointed with a just pride to the Christian Church, which remained
an unviolated sanctuary during the horrors of the
sack, as a proof that a new spirit of sanctity and of reverence
had descended upon the world. The Pagan, in his turn,
pointed to what he deemed a not less significant fact&mdash;the
golden statues of Valour and of Fortune were melted down
to pay the ransom to the conquerors.<note place='foot'>Zosimus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> v. 41. This was
on the first occasion when Rome
was menaced by Alaric.</note> Many of the Christians
contemplated with an indifference that almost amounted
to complacency what they regarded as the predicted ruin of
the city of the fallen gods.<note place='foot'>See Merivale's <hi rend='italic'>Conversion of
the Northern Nations</hi>, pp. 207-210.</note> When the Vandals swept over
Africa, the Donatists, maddened by the persecution of the
orthodox, received them with open arms, and contributed
their share to that deadly blow.<note place='foot'>See Sismondi, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la
Chute de l'Empire romain</hi>, tome i.
p. 230.</note> The immortal pass of
Thermopylæ was surrendered without a struggle to the
Goths. A Pagan writer accused the monks of having betrayed
it.<note place='foot'>Eunapius. There is no other
authority for the story of the
treachery, which is not believed
by Gibbon.</note> It is more probable that they had absorbed or
diverted the heroism that in other days would have defended
it. The conquest, at a later date, of Egypt, by the Mohammedans,
was in a great measure due to an invitation from
the persecuted Monophysites.<note place='foot'>Sismondi, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Chute de
l'Empire romain</hi>, tome ii. pp. 52-54;
Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 213. The Monophysites
were greatly afflicted because,
after the conquest, the Mohammedans
tolerated the orthodox
believers as well as themselves,
and were unable to appreciate
the distinction between them. In
Gaul, the orthodox clergy favoured
the invasions of the Franks, who,
alone of the barbarian conquerors
of Gaul, were Catholics, and St.
Aprunculus was obliged to fly, the
Burgundians desiring to kill him
on account of his suspected connivance
with the invaders. (Greg.
<hi rend='italic'>Tur.</hi> ii. 23.)</note> Subsequent religious wars
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
have again and again exhibited the same phenomenon. The
treachery of a religionist to his country no longer argued an
absence of all moral feeling. It had become compatible with
the deepest religious enthusiasm, and with all the courage of
a martyr.
</p>

<p>
It is somewhat difficult to form a just estimate of how far
the attitude assumed by the Church towards the barbarian
invaders has on the whole proved beneficial to mankind. The
Empire, as we have seen, had long been, both morally and politically,
in a condition of manifest decline; its fall, though it
might have been retarded, could scarcely have been averted,
and the new religion, even in its most superstitious form,
while it did much to displace, did also much to elicit moral
enthusiasm. It is impossible to deny that the Christian
priesthood contributed very materially, both by their charity
and by their arbitration, to mitigate the calamities that
accompanied the dissolution of the Empire;<note place='foot'>Dean Milman says of the
Church, <q>if treacherous to the interests
of the Roman Empire, it
was true to those of mankind.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
of Christianity</hi>, vol. iii. p. 48.
So Gibbon: <q>If the decline of the
Roman Empire was hastened by
the conversion of Constantine, the
victorious religion broke the violence
of the fall and mollified the
ferocious temper of the conquerors.</q>&mdash;Ch.
xxxviii.</note> and it is equally
impossible to doubt that their political attitude greatly
increased their power for good. Standing between the conflicting
forces, almost indifferent to the issue, and notoriously
exempt from the passions of the combat, they obtained with
the conqueror, and used for the benefit of the conquered, a
degree of influence they would never have possessed, had they
been regarded as Roman patriots. Their attitude, however,
marked a complete, and, as it has proved, a permanent, change
in the position assigned to patriotism in the moral scale. It
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
has occasionally happened in later times, that churches have
found it for their interest to appeal to this sentiment in their
conflict with opposing creeds, or that patriots have found the
objects of churchmen in harmony with their own; and in
these cases a fusion of theological and patriotic feeling has
taken place, in which each has intensified the other. Such
has been the effect of the conflict between the Spaniards and
the Moors, between the Poles and the Russians, between the
Scotch Puritans and the English Episcopalians, between the
Irish Catholics and the English Protestants. But patriotism
itself, as a duty, has never found any place in Christian
ethics, and strong theological feeling has usually been directly
hostile to its growth. Ecclesiastics have, no doubt, taken a
very large share in political affairs, but this has been in most
cases solely with the object of wresting them into conformity
with ecclesiastical designs; and no other body of men have
so uniformly sacrificed the interests of their country to the
interests of their class. For the repugnance between the
theological and the patriotic spirit, three reasons may, I
think, be assigned. The first is that tendency of strong
religious feeling to divert the mind from all terrestrial cares
and passions, of which the ascetic life was the extreme
expression, but which has always, under different forms, been
manifested in the Church. The second arises from the fact
that each form of theological opinion embodies itself in a
visible and organised church, with a government, interest,
and policy of its own, and a frontier often intersecting rather
than following national boundaries; and these churches
attract to themselves the attachment and devotion that
would naturally be bestowed upon the country and its
rulers. The third reason is, that the saintly and the heroic
characters, which represent the ideals of religion and of
patriotism, are generically different; for although they have
no doubt many common elements of virtue, the distinctive
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
excellence of each is derived from a proportion or disposition
of qualities altogether different from that of the other.<note place='foot'>Observe with what a fine perception
St. Augustine notices the
essentially unchristian character
of the moral dispositions to which
the greatness of Rome was due.
He quotes the sentence of Sallust:
<q>Civitas, incredibile memoratu est,
adeptâ libertate quantum brevi
creverit, tanta cupido gloriæ incesserat;</q>
and adds: <q>Ista ergo laudis
aviditas et cupido gloriæ multa
illa miranda fecit, laudabilia scilicet
atque gloriosa secundum hominum
existimationem ... causa
honoris, laudis et gloriæ consuluerunt
patriæ, in qua ipsam gloriam
requirebant, salutemque ejus saluti
suæ præponere non dubitaverunt,
pro isto uno vitio, id est, amore
laudis, pecuniæ cupiditatem et
multa alia vitia comprimentes....
Quid aliud amarent quam gloriam,
qua volebant etiam post mortem
tanquam vivere in ore laudantium?</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De
Civ. Dei</hi>, v. 12-13.</note>
</p>

<p>
Before dismissing this very important revolution in moral
history, I may add two remarks. In the first place, we may
observe that the relation of the two great schools of morals
to active and political life has been completely changed.
Among the ancients, the Stoics, who regarded virtue and
vice as generically different from all other things, participated
actively in public life, and made this participation one of the
first of duties; while the Epicureans, who resolved virtue into
utility, and esteemed happiness its supreme motive, abstained
from public life, and taught their disciples to neglect it.
Asceticism followed the Stoical school in teaching that virtue
and happiness are generically different things; but it was at
the same time eminently unfavourable to civic virtue. On
the other hand, that great industrial movement which has
arisen since the abolition of slavery, and which has always
been essentially utilitarian in its spirit, has been one of the
most active and influential elements of political progress.
This change, though, as far as I know, entirely unnoticed by
historians, constitutes, I believe, one of the great landmarks
of moral history.
</p>

<p>
The second observation I would make relates to the estimate
we form of the value of patriotic actions. However
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
much historians may desire to extend their researches to the
private and domestic virtues of a people, civic virtues are
always those which must appear most prominently in their
pages. History is concerned only with large bodies of men.
The systems of philosophy or religion which produce splendid
results on the great theatre of public life are fully and easily
appreciated, and readers and writers are both liable to give
them very undue advantages over those systems which do
not favour civic virtues, but exercise their beneficial influence
in the more obscure fields of individual self-culture, domestic
morals, or private charity. If valued by the self-sacrifice
they imply, or by their effects upon human happiness, these
last rank very high, but they scarcely appear in history, and
they therefore seldom obtain their due weight in historical
comparisons. Christianity has, I think, suffered peculiarly
from this cause. Its moral action has always been much
more powerful upon individuals than upon societies, and the
spheres in which its superiority over other religions is most
incontestable, are precisely those which history is least
capable of realising.
</p>

<p>
In attempting to estimate the moral condition of the
Roman and Byzantine Empires during the Christian period,
and before the old civilisation had been dissolved by the
barbarian or Mohammedan invasions, we must continually
bear this last consideration in mind. We must remember,
too, that Christianity had acquired an ascendancy among
nations which were already deeply tainted by the inveterate
vices of a corrupt and decaying civilisation, and also that
many of the censors from whose pages we are obliged to
form our estimate of the age were men who judged human
frailties with all the fastidiousness of ascetics, and who expressed
their judgments with all the declamatory exaggeration
of the pulpit. Modern critics will probably not lay much
stress upon the relapse of the Christians into the ordinary
dress and usages of the luxurious society about them, upon
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
the ridicule thrown by Christians on those who still adhered
to the primitive austerity of the sect, or upon the fact that
multitudes who were once mere nominal Pagans had become
mere nominal Christians. We find, too, a frequent disposition
on the part of moralists to single out some new form of
luxury, or some trivial custom which they regarded as indecorous,
for the most extravagant denunciation, and to magnify
its importance in a manner which in a later age it is difficult
even to understand. Examples of this kind may be found
both in Pagan and in Christian writings, and they form an
extremely curious page in the history of morals. Thus
Juvenal exhausts his vocabulary of invective in denouncing
the atrocious criminality of a certain noble, who in the very
year of his consulship did not hesitate&mdash;not, it is true, by
day, but at least in the sight of the moon and of the stars&mdash;with
his own hand to drive his own chariot along the public
road.<note place='foot'><p><q>Præter majorum cineres atque ossa, volucri<lb/>
Carpento rapitur pinguis Damasippus et ipse,<lb/>
Ipse rotam stringit multo sufflamine consul;<lb/>
Nocte quidem; sed luna videt, sed sidera testes<lb/>
Intendunt oculos. Finitum tempus honoris<lb/>
Quum fuerit, clara Damasippus luce flagellum
Sumet.</q>&mdash;Juvenal, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> viii. 146.</p></note> Seneca was scarcely less scandalised by the atrocious
and, as he thought, unnatural luxury of those who had
adopted the custom of cooling different beverages by mixing
them with snow.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nat. Quæst.</hi> iv. 13. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 78.</note> Pliny assures us that the most monstrous
of all criminals was the man who first devised the luxurious
custom of wearing golden rings.<note place='foot'><q>Pessimum vitæ scelus fecit,
qui id [aurum] primus induit digitis ...
quisquis primus instituit
cunctanter id fecit, lævisque manibus,
latentibusque induit.</q>&mdash;Plin.
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxxiii. 4.</note> Apuleius was compelled
to defend himself for having eulogised tooth-powder, and he
did so, among other ways, by arguing that nature has justified
this form of propriety, for crocodiles were known periodically
to leave the waters of the Nile, and to lie with open jaws
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
upon the banks, while a certain bird proceeds with its beak
to clean their teeth.<note place='foot'>See a curious passage in his
<hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi>. It should be said that
we have only his own account of
the charges brought against him.</note> If we were to measure the criminality
of different customs by the vehemence of the patristic denunciations,
we might almost conclude that the most atrocious
offence of their day was the custom of wearing false hair,
or dyeing natural hair. Clement of Alexandria questioned
whether the validity of certain ecclesiastical ceremonies
might not be affected by wigs; for, he asked, when the priest
is placing his hand on the head of the person who kneels
before him, if that hand is resting upon false hair, who is it
he is really blessing? Tertullian shuddered at the thought
that Christians might have the hair of those who were in hell
upon their heads, and he found in the tiers of false hair that
were in use a distinct rebellion against the assertion that no
one can add to his stature, and, in the custom of dyeing the
hair, a contravention of the declaration that man cannot
make one hair white or black. Centuries rolled away. The
Roman Empire tottered to its fall, and floods of vice and
sorrow overspread the world; but still the denunciations of
the Fathers were unabated. St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, and
St. Gregory Nazianzen continued with uncompromising vehemence
the war against false hair, which Tertullian and
Clement of Alexandria had begun.<note place='foot'>The history of false hair has
been written with much learning
by M. Guerle in his <hi rend='italic'>Éloge des Perruques</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
But although the vehemence of the Fathers on such trivial
matters might appear at first sight to imply the existence of
a society in which grave corruption was rare, such a conclusion
would be totally untrue. After every legitimate allowance
has been made, the pictures of Roman society by Ammianus
Marcellinus, of the society of Marseilles, by Salvian,
of the society of Asia Minor, and of Constantinople, by
Chrysostom, as well as the whole tenor of the history, and
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
innumerable incidental notices in the writers, of the time,
exhibit a condition of depravity, and especially of degradation,
which has seldom been surpassed.<note place='foot'>The fullest view of this age is
given in a very learned little work
by Peter Erasmus Müller (1797),
<hi rend='italic'>De Genio Ævi Theodosiani</hi>. Montfaucon
has also devoted two essays
to the moral condition of the Eastern
world, one of which is given in
Jortin's <hi rend='italic'>Remarks on Ecclesiastical
History</hi>.</note> The corruption had
reached classes and institutions that appeared the most holy.
The Agapæ, or love feasts, which formed one of the most
touching symbols of Christian unity, had become scenes of
drunkenness and of riot. Denounced by the Fathers, condemned
by the Council of Laodicea in the fourth century,
and afterwards by the Council of Carthage, they lingered as
a scandal and an offence till they were finally suppressed by
the Council of Trullo, at the end of the seventh century.<note place='foot'>See on these abuses Mosheim,
<hi rend='italic'>Eccl. Hist.</hi> (Soame's ed.), vol. i. p.
463; Cave's <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Christianity</hi>,
part i. ch. xi.</note>
The commemoration of the martyrs soon degenerated into
scandalous dissipation. Fairs were held on the occasion,
gross breaches of chastity were frequent, and the annual festival
was suppressed on account of the immorality it produced.<note place='foot'>Cave's <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Christianity</hi>,
part i. ch. vii.</note>
The ambiguous position of the clergy with reference
to marriage already led to grave disorder. In the time of
St. Cyprian, before the outbreak of the Decian persecution,
it had been common to find clergy professing celibacy, but
keeping, under various pretexts, their mistresses in their
houses;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lxi.</note> and, after Constantine, the complaints on this subject
became loud and general.<note place='foot'>Evagrius describes with much
admiration how certain monks of
Palestine, by <q>a life wholly excellent
and divine,</q> had so overcome
their passions that they were accustomed
to bathe with women;
for <q>neither sight nor touch, nor a
woman's embrace, could make them
relapse into their natural condition.
Among men they desired to be
men, and among women, women.</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> i. 21.)</note> Virgins and monks often lived
together in the same house, professing sometimes to share in
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
chastity the same bed.<note place='foot'>These <q>mulieres subintroductæ,</q>
as they were called, are
continually noticed by Cyprian,
Jerome, and Chrysostom. See
Müller, <hi rend='italic'>De Genio Ævi Theodosiani</hi>,
and also the <hi rend='italic'>Codex Theod.</hi> xvi. tit.
ii. lex 44, with the Comments. Dr.
Todd, in his learned <hi rend='italic'>Life of St.
Patrick</hi> (p. 91), quotes (I shall not
venture to do so) from the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of
the Irish Saints</hi> an extremely curious
legend of a kind of contest of
sanctity between St. Scuthinus and
St. Brendan, in which it was clearly
proved that the former had mastered
his passions more completely
than the latter. An enthusiast
named Robert d'Arbrisselles is said
in the twelfth century to have revived
the custom. (Jortin's <hi rend='italic'>Remarks</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1106.)</note> Rich widows were surrounded by
swarms of clerical sycophants, who addressed them in tender
diminutives, studied and consulted their every foible, and,
under the guise of piety, lay in wait for their gifts or bequests.<note place='foot'>St. Jerome gives (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lii.) an
extremely curious picture of these
clerical flatterers, and several examples
of the terms of endearment
they were accustomed to employ.
The tone of flattery which St. Jerome
himself, though doubtless
with the purest motives, employs
in his copious correspondence with
his female admirers, is to a modern
layman peculiarly repulsive, and
sometimes verges upon blasphemy.
In his letter to Eustochium, whose
daughter as a nun had become the
<q>bride of Christ,</q> he calls the
mother <q>Socrus Dei,</q> the mother-in-law
of God. See, too, the extravagant
flatteries of Chrysostom
in his correspondence with Olympias.</note>
The evil attained such a point that a law was
made under Valentinian depriving the Christian priests
and monks of that power of receiving legacies which was
possessed by every other class of the community; and St.
Jerome has mournfully acknowledged that the prohibition
was necessary.<note place='foot'><q>Pudet dicere sacerdotes idolorum,
mimi et aurigæ et scorta
hæreditates capiunt; solis clericis
et monachis hoc lege prohibetur,
et prohibetur non a persecutoribus,
sed a principibus Christianis.
Nec de lege conqueror sed
doleo cur meruerimus hanc legem.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lii.</note> Great multitudes entered the Church to
avoid municipal offices;<note place='foot'>See Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Early
Christianity</hi>, vol. ii. p. 314.</note> the deserts were crowded with men
whose sole object was to escape from honest labour, and even
soldiers used to desert their colours for the monasteries.<note place='foot'>This was one cause of the
disputes between St. Gregory the
Great and the Emperor Eustace.
St. Chrysostom frequently notices
the opposition of the military and
the monastic spirits.</note>
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
Noble ladies, pretending a desire to lead a higher life, abandoned
their husbands to live with low-born lovers.<note place='foot'>Hieron. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxviii.</note> Palestine,
which was soon crowded with pilgrims, had become,
in the time of St. Gregory of Nyssa, a hotbed of debauchery.<note place='foot'>St. Greg. Nyss. <hi rend='italic'>Ad eund.
Hieros</hi>. Some Catholic writers
have attempted to throw doubt
upon the genuineness of this epistle,
but, Dean Milman thinks, with no
sufficient reason. Its account of
Jerusalem is to some extent corroborated
by St. Jerome. (<hi rend='italic'>Ad Paulinum</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxix.)</note>
The evil reputation of pilgrimages long continued; and in
the eighth century we find St. Boniface writing to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, imploring the bishops to take some
measures to restrain or regulate the pilgrimages of their
fellow-countrywomen; for there were few towns in central
Europe, on the way to Rome, where English ladies, who
started as pilgrims, were not living in open prostitution.<note place='foot'><q>Præterea non taceo charitati
vestræ, quia omnibus servis Dei qui
hic vel in Scriptura vel in timore Dei
probatissimi esse videntur, displicet
quod bonum et honestas et pudicitia
vestræ ecclesiæ illuditur; et
aliquod levamentum turpitudinis
esset, si prohiberet synodus et
principes vestri mulieribus et velatis
feminis illud iter et frequentiam,
quam ad Romanam civitatem
veniendo et redeundo faciunt, quia
magna ex parte pereunt, paucis
remeantibus integris. Perpaucæ
enim sunt civitates in Longobardia
vel in Francia aut in Gallia in qua
non sit adultera vel meretrix generis
Anglorum, quod scandalum est
et turpitudo totius ecclesiæ vestræ.</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 745)
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lxiii.</note>
The luxury and ambition of the higher prelates, and the passion
for amusements of the inferior priests,<note place='foot'>See Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 8.</note> were bitterly
acknowledged. St. Jerome complained that the banquets of
many bishops eclipsed in splendour those of the provincial
governors, and the intrigues by which they obtained offices,
and the fierce partisanship of their supporters, appear in every
page of ecclesiastical history.
</p>

<p>
In the lay world, perhaps the chief characteristic was extreme
childishness. The moral enthusiasm was greater than
it had been in most periods of Paganism, but, being drawn
away to the desert, it had little influence upon society. The
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
simple fact that the quarrels between the factions of the
chariot races for a long period eclipsed all political, intellectual,
and even religious differences, filled the streets again
and again with bloodshed, and more than once determined
great revolutions in the State, is sufficient to show the extent
of the decadence. Patriotism and courage had almost disappeared,
and, notwithstanding the rise of a Belisarius or a
Narses, the level of public men was extremely depressed.
The luxury of the court, the servility of the courtiers, and the
prevailing splendour of dress and of ornament, had attained an
extravagant height. The world grew accustomed to a dangerous
alternation of extreme asceticism and gross vice, and
sometimes, as in the case of Antioch,<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. eccl.</hi> tome xi. p. 547.</note> the most vicious and
luxurious cities produced the most numerous anchorites.
There existed a combination of vice and superstition which is
eminently prejudicial to the nobility, though not equally detrimental
to the happiness, of man. Public opinion was so
low, that very many forms of vice attracted little condemnation
and punishment, while undoubted belief in the absolving
efficacy of superstitious rites calmed the imagination and
allayed the terrors of conscience. There was more falsehood
and treachery than under the Cæsars, but there was
much less cruelty, violence, and shamelessness. There was
also less public spirit, less independence of character, less
intellectual freedom.
</p>

<p>
In some respects, however, Christianity had already
effected a great improvement. The gladiatorial games had
disappeared from the West, and had not been introduced
into Constantinople. The vast schools of prostitution which
had grown up under the name of temples of Venus were suppressed.
Religion, however deformed and debased, was at
least no longer a seedplot of depravity, and under the influence
of Christianity the effrontery of vice had in a great
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
measure disappeared. The gross and extravagant indecency
of representation, of which we have still examples in the
paintings on the walls, and the signs on many of the portals
of Pompeii; the banquets of rich patricians, served by naked
girls; the hideous excesses of unnatural lust, in which some
of the Pagan emperors had indulged with so much publicity,
were no longer tolerated. Although sensuality was very
general, it was less obtrusive, and unnatural and eccentric
forms had become rare. The presence of a great Church,
which, amid much superstition and fanaticism, still taught a
pure morality, and enforced it by the strongest motives, was
everywhere felt&mdash;controlling, strengthening, or overawing.
The ecclesiastics were a great body in the State. The cause
of virtue was strongly organised; it drew to itself the best
men, determined the course of vacillating but amiable natures,
and placed some restraint upon the vicious. A bad
man might be insensible to the moral beauties of religion,
but he was still haunted by the recollection of its threatenings.
If he emancipated himself from its influence in health
and prosperity, its power returned in periods of sickness or
danger, or on the eve of the commission of some great crime.
If he had nerved himself against all its terrors, he was at least
checked and governed at every turn by the public opinion
which it had created. That total absence of all restraint,
all decency, and all fear and remorse, which had been evinced
by some of the monsters of crime who occupied the Pagan
throne, and which proves most strikingly the decay of the
Pagan religion, was no longer possible. The virtue of the
best Pagans was perhaps of as high an order as that of the
best Christians, though it was of a somewhat different type,
but the vice of the worst Pagans certainly far exceeded that
of the worst Christians. The pulpit had become a powerful
centre of attraction, and charities of many kinds were actively
developed.
</p>

<p>
The moral effects of the first great outburst of asceticism,
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
so far as we have yet traced them, appear almost unmingled
evils. In addition to the essentially distorted ideal of perfection
it produced, the simple withdrawal from active life of
that moral enthusiasm, which is the leaven of society, was
extremely pernicious, and there can be little doubt that to
this cause we must in a great degree attribute the conspicuous
failure of the Church, for some centuries, to effect any more
considerable amelioration in the moral condition of Europe.
There were, however, some distinctive excellences springing
even from the first phase of asceticism, which, although they
do not, as I conceive, suffice to counterbalance these evils,
may justly qualify our censure.
</p>

<p>
The first condition of all really great moral excellence is
a spirit of genuine self-sacrifice and self-renunciation. The
habits of compromise, moderation, reciprocal self-restraint,
gentleness, courtesy, and refinement, which are appropriate
to luxurious or utilitarian civilisations, are very favourable
to the development of many secondary virtues; but there is in
human nature a capacity for a higher and more heroic reach
of excellence, which demands very different spheres for its
display, accustoms men to far nobler aims, and exercises a
far greater attractive influence upon mankind. Imperfect
and distorted as was the ideal of the anchorite; deeply, too,
as it was perverted by the admixture of a spiritual selfishness,
still the example of many thousands, who, in obedience
to what they believed to be right, voluntarily gave up everything
that men hold dear, cast to the winds every compromise
with enjoyment, and made extreme self-abnegation the
very principle of their lives, was not wholly lost upon the
world. At a time when increasing riches had profoundly
tainted the Church, they taught men <q>to love labour more
than rest, and ignominy more than glory, and to give more than
to receive.</q><note place='foot'>This was enjoined in the rule of St. Paphnutius. See Tillemont,
tome x. p. 45.</note> At a time when the passion for ecclesiastical
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
dignities had become the scandal of the Empire, they systematically
abstained from them, teaching, in their quaint but
energetic language, that <q>there are two classes a monk should
especially avoid&mdash;bishops and women.</q><note place='foot'><q>Omnimodis monachum fugere
debere mulieres et episcopos.</q>&mdash;Cassian,
<hi rend='italic'>De Cœnob. Inst.</hi> xi. 17.</note> The very eccentricities
of their lives, their uncouth forms, their horrible
penances, won the admiration of rude men, and the superstitious
reverence thus excited gradually passed to the charity
and the self-denial which formed the higher elements of the
monastic character. Multitudes of barbarians were converted
to Christianity at the sight of St. Simeon Stylites. The hermit,
too, was speedily idealised by the popular imagination. The
more repulsive features of his life and appearance were forgotten.
He was thought of only as an old man with long white
beard and gentle aspect, weaving his mats beneath the palm-trees,
while dæmons vainly tried to distract him by their stratagems,
and the wild beasts grew tame in his presence, and every
disease and every sorrow vanished at his word. The imagination
of Christendom, fascinated by this ideal, made it the
centre of countless legends, usually very childish, and occasionally,
as we have seen, worse than childish, yet full of
beautiful touches of human nature, and often conveying admirable
moral lessons.<note place='foot'>We also find now and then,
though I think very rarely, intellectual
flashes of some brilliancy.
Two of them strike me as especially
noteworthy. St. Arsenius refused
to separate young criminals from
communion though he had no
hesitation about old men; for he
had observed that young men
speedily get accustomed and indifferent
to the state of excommunication,
while old men feel
continually, and acutely, the separation.
(Socrates, iv. 23.) St.
Apollonius explained the Egyptian
idolatry with the most intelligent
rationalism. The ox, he thought,
was in the first instance worshipped
for its domestic uses; the Nile,
because it was the chief cause of
the fertility of the soil &amp;c. (Rufinus,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Mon.</hi> cap. vii.)</note> Nursery tales, which first determine
the course of the infant imagination, play no inconsiderable
part in the history of humanity. In the fable of Psyche&mdash;that
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
bright tale of passionate love with which the Greek
mother lulled her child to rest&mdash;Pagan antiquity has bequeathed
us a single specimen of transcendent beauty, and the
lives of the saints of the desert often exhibit an imagination
different indeed in kind, but scarcely less brilliant in its display.
St. Antony, we are told, was thinking one night that
he was the best man in the desert, when it was revealed to
him that there was another hermit far holier than himself. In
the morning he started across the desert to visit this unknown
saint. He met first of all a centaur, and afterwards a little
man with horns and goat's feet, who said that he was a faun;
and these, having pointed out the way, he arrived at last at
his destination. St. Paul the hermit, at whose cell he stopped,
was one hundred and thirteen years old, and, having been
living for a very long period in absolute solitude, he at first
refused to admit the visitor, but at last consented, embraced
him, and began, with a very pardonable curiosity, to question
him minutely about the world he had left; <q>whether there
was much new building in the towns, what empire ruled the
world, whether there were any idolaters remaining?</q> The
colloquy was interrupted by a crow, which came with a loaf
of bread, and St. Paul, observing that during the last sixty
years his daily allowance had been only half a loaf, declared
that this was a proof that he had done right in admitting
Antony. The hermits returned thanks, and sat down together
by the margin of a glassy stream. But now a difficulty
arose. Neither could bring himself to break the loaf
before the other. St. Paul alleged that St. Antony, being
his guest, should take the precedence; but St. Antony, who
was only ninety years old, dwelt upon the greater age of St.
Paul. So scrupulously polite were these old men, that they
passed the entire afternoon disputing on this weighty question,
till at last, when the evening was drawing in, a happy
thought struck them, and, each holding one end of the loaf,
they pulled together. To abridge the story, St. Paul soon
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
died, and his companion, being a weak old man, was unable
to bury him, when two lions came from the desert and dug
the grave with their paws, deposited the body in it, raised a
loud howl of lamentation, and then knelt down submissively
before St. Antony, to beg a blessing. The authority for this
history is no less a person than St. Jerome, who relates it as
literally true, and intersperses his narrative with severe
reflections on all who might question his accuracy.
</p>

<p>
The historian Palladius assures us that he heard from
the lips of St. Macarius of Alexandria an account of a pilgrimage
which that saint had made, under the impulse of
curiosity, to visit the enchanted garden of Jannes and Jambres,
tenanted by dæmons. For nine days Macarius traversed
the desert, directing his course by the stars, and, from time
to time, fixing reeds in the ground, as landmarks for his
return; but this precaution proved useless, for the devils
tore up the reeds, and placed them during the night by the
head of the sleeping saint. As he drew near the garden,
seventy dæmons of various forms came forth to meet him,
and reproached him for disturbing them in their home. St.
Macarius promised simply to walk round and inspect the
wonders of the garden, and then depart without doing it
any injury. He fulfilled his promise, and a journey of twenty
days brought him again to his cell.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> cap.
xix.</note> Other legends are,
however, of a less fantastic nature; and many of them
display, though sometimes in very whimsical forms, a spirit
of courtesy which seems to foreshadow the later chivalry,
and some of them contain striking protests against the very
superstitions that were most prevalent. When St. Macarius
was sick, a bunch of grapes was once given to him; but his
charity impelled him to give them to another hermit, who in
his turn refused to keep them, and at last, having made the
circuit of the entire desert, they were returned to the saint.<note place='foot'>Rufinus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Monach.</hi> cap.
xxix.</note>
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
The same saint, whose usual beverage was putrid water,
never failed to drink wine when set before him by the
hermits he visited, atoning privately for this relaxation,
which he thought the laws of courtesy required, by abstaining
from water for as many days as he had drunk
glasses of wine.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. eccl.</hi> tome
viii. pp. 583, 584.</note> One of his disciples once meeting an
idolatrous priest running in great haste across the desert,
with a great stick in his hand, cried out in a loud voice,
<q>Where are you going, dæmon?</q> The priest, naturally
indignant, beat the Christian severely, and was proceeding
on his way, when he met St. Macarius, who accosted him
so courteously and so tenderly that the Pagan's heart was
touched, he became a convert, and his first act of charity
was to tend the Christian whom he had beaten.<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 589.</note> St. Avitus
being on a visit to St. Marcian, this latter saint placed before
him some bread, which Avitus refused to eat, saying that
it was his custom never to touch food till after sunset. St.
Marcian, professing his own inability to defer his repast,
implored his guest for once to break this custom, and being
refused, exclaimed, <q>Alas! I am filled with anguish that you
have come here to see a wise man and a saint, and you see
only a glutton.</q> St. Avitus was grieved, and said, <q>he
would rather even eat flesh than hear such words,</q> and
he sat down as desired. St. Marcian then confessed that his
own custom was the same as that of his brother saint; <q>but,</q>
he added, <q>we know that charity is better than fasting; for
charity is enjoined by the Divine law, but fasting is left in
our own power and will.</q><note place='foot'>Theodoret, <hi rend='italic'>Philoth.</hi> cap. iii.</note> St. Epiphanius having invited
St. Hilarius to his cell, placed before him a dish of fowl.
<q>Pardon me, father,</q> said St. Hilarius, <q>but since I have
become a monk I have never eaten flesh.</q> <q>And I,</q> said St.
Epiphanius, <q>since I have become a monk have never suffered
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
the sun to go down upon my wrath.</q> <q>Your rule,</q> rejoined
the other, <q>is more excellent than mine.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum.</hi></note> While a rich lady
was courteously fulfilling the duties of hospitality to a monk,
her child, whom she had for this purpose left, fell into a well.
It lay unharmed upon the surface of the water, and afterwards
told its mother that it had seen the arms of the saint
sustaining it below.<note place='foot'>Theodoret, <hi rend='italic'>Philoth.</hi> cap. ii.</note> At a time when it was the custom to
look upon the marriage state with profound contempt, it was
revealed to St. Macarius of Egypt that two married women
in a neighbouring city were more holy than he was. The
saint immediately visited them, and asked their mode of
life, but they utterly repudiated the notion of their sanctity.
<q>Holy father,</q> they said, <q>suffer us to tell you frankly the
truth. Even this very night we did not shrink from sleeping
with our husbands, and what good works, then, can you
expect from us?</q> The saint, however, persisted in his inquiries,
and they then told him their stories. <q>We are,</q> they
said, <q>in no way related, but we married two brothers. We
have lived together for fifteen years, without one licentious
or angry word. We have entreated our husbands to let us
leave them, to join the societies of holy virgins, but they
refused to permit us, and we then promised before Heaven
that no worldly word should sully our lips.</q> <q>Of a truth,</q>
cried St. Macarius, <q>I see that God regards not whether one
is virgin or married, whether one is in a monastery or in the
world. He considers only the disposition of the heart, and
gives the Spirit to all who desire to serve Him, whatever
their condition may be.</q><note place='foot'>Tillemont, tome viii. pp. 594-595.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have multiplied these illustrations to an extent that
must, I fear, have already somewhat taxed the patience of
my readers; but the fact that, during a long period of history,
these saintly legends formed the ideals guiding the imagination
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
and reflecting the moral sentiment of the Christian
world, gives them an importance far beyond their intrinsic
value. Before dismissing the saints of the desert, there is
one other class of legends to which I desire to advert. I
mean those which describe the connection between saints
and the animal world. These legends are, I think, worthy of
special notice in moral history, as representing the first,
and at the same time one of the most striking efforts ever
made in Christendom to inculcate a feeling of kindness and
pity towards the brute creation. In Pagan antiquity, considerable
steps had been made to raise this form of humanity
to a recognised branch of ethics. The way had been prepared
by numerous anecdotes growing for the most part
out of simple ignorance of natural history, which all tended
to diminish the chasm between men and animals, by representing
the latter as possessing to a very high degree both
moral and rational qualities. Elephants, it was believed,
were endowed not only with reason and benevolence, but
also with reverential feelings. They worshipped the sun and
moon, and in the forests of Mauritania they were accustomed
to assemble every new moon, at a certain river, to perform
religious rites.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> viii. 1.
Many anecdotes of elephants are
collected viii. 1-12. See, too,
Dion Cassius, xxxix. 38.</note> The hippopotamus taught men the medicinal
value of bleeding, being accustomed, when affected by plethory,
to bleed itself with a thorn, and afterwards close the
wound with slime.<note place='foot'>Pliny, viii. 40.</note> Pelicans committed suicide to feed their
young; and bees, when they had broken the laws of their
sovereign.<note place='foot'>Donne's <hi rend='italic'>Biathanatos</hi>. p. 22.
This habit of bees is mentioned by
St. Ambrose. The pelican, as is
well known, afterwards became an
emblem of Christ.</note> A temple was erected at Sestos to commemorate
the affection of an eagle which loved a young girl, and upon
her death cast itself in despair into the flames by which her
body was consumed.<note place='foot'>Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> x. 6.</note> Numerous anecdotes are related of
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
faithful dogs which refused to survive their masters, and one
of these had, it was said, been transformed into the dog-star.<note place='foot'>A long list of legends about
dogs is given by Legendre, in the
very curious chapter on animals, in
his <hi rend='italic'>Traité de l'Opinion</hi>, tome i.
pp. 308-327.</note>
The dolphin, especially, became the subject of many beautiful
legends, and its affection for its young, for music, and above
all for little children, excited the admiration not only of the
populace, but of the most distinguished naturalists.<note place='foot'>Pliny tells some extremely
pretty stories of this kind. (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Nat.</hi> ix. 8-9.) See, too, Aulus
Gellius, xvi. 19. The dolphin, on
account of its love for its young,
became a common symbol of Christ
among the early Christians.</note> Many
philosophers ascribed to animals a rational soul, like that of
man. According to the Pythagoreans, human souls transmigrate
after death into animals. According to the Stoics and
others, the souls of men and animals were alike parts of the
all-pervading Divine Spirit that animates the world.<note place='foot'>A very full account of the
opinions, both of ancient and
modern philosophers, concerning
the souls of animals, is given by
Bayle, <hi rend='italic'>Dict.</hi> arts. <q>Pereira E,</q>
<q>Rorarius K.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
We may even find traces from an early period of a certain
measure of legislative protection for animals. By a very
natural process, the ox, as a principal agent in agriculture,
and therefore a kind of symbol of civilisation, was in many
different countries regarded with a peculiar reverence. The
sanctity attached to it in Egypt is well known. That tenderness
to animals, which is one of the most beautiful features
in the Old Testament writings, shows itself, among other
ways, in the command not to muzzle the ox that treadeth out
the corn, or to yoke together the ox and the ass.<note place='foot'>The Jewish law did not confine
its care to oxen. The reader
will remember the touching provision,
<q>Thou shalt not seethe a
kid in his mother's milk</q> (Deut.
xiv. 21); and the law forbidding
men to take a parent bird that was
sitting on its young or on its eggs.
(Deut. xxii. 6, 7.)</note> Among
the early Romans the same feeling was carried so far, that
for a long time it was actually a capital offence to slaughter
an ox, that animal being pronounced, in a special sense, the
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
fellow-labourer of man.<note place='foot'><q>Cujus tanta fuit apud antiquos
veneratio, ut tam capital esset
bovem necuisse quam civem.</q>&mdash;Columella,
lib. vi. in proœm. <q>Hic
socius hominum in rustico opere et
Cereris minister. Ab hoc antiqui
manus ita abstinere voluerunt ut
capite sanxerint si quis occidisset.</q>&mdash;Varro,
<hi rend='italic'>De Re Rustic.</hi> lib. ii. cap.
v.</note> A similar law is said to have in
early times existed in Greece.<note place='foot'>See Legendre, tome ii. p. 338.
The sword with which the priest
sacrificed the ox was afterwards
pronounced accursed. (Ælian,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Var.</hi> lib. viii. cap. iii.)</note> The beautiful passage in which
the Psalmist describes how the sparrow could find a shelter
and a home in the altar of the temple, was as applicable to
Greece as to Jerusalem. The sentiment of Xenocrates who,
when a bird pursued by a hawk took refuge in his breast,
caressed and finally released it, saying to his disciples, that a
good man should never give up a suppliant,<note place='foot'>Diog. Laërt. <hi rend='italic'>Xenocrates</hi>.</note> was believed to
be shared by the gods, and it was regarded as an act of impiety
to disturb the birds who had built their nests beneath
the porticoes of the temple.<note place='foot'>There is a story told by
Herodotus (i. 157-159) of an ambassador
who was sent by his fellow-countrymen
to consult an oracle
at Miletus about a suppliant who
had taken refuge with the Cymæans
and was demanded with menace by
his enemies. The oracle, being
bribed, enjoined the surrender.
The ambassador on leaving, with
seeming carelessness disturbed the
sparrows under the portico of the
temple, when the voice from behind
the altar denounced his impiety for
disturbing the guests of the gods.
The ambassador replied with an obvious
and withering retort. Ælian
says (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Var.</hi>) that the Athenians
condemned to death a boy for killing
a sparrow that had taken
refuge in the temple of Æsculapius.</note> A case is related of a child who
was even put to death on account of an act of aggravated
cruelty to birds.<note place='foot'>Quintilian, <hi rend='italic'>Inst.</hi> v. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
The general tendency of nations, as they advance from
a rude and warlike to a refined and peaceful condition, from
the stage in which the realising powers are faint and dull, to
that in which they are sensitive and vivid, is undoubtedly to
become more gentle and humane in their actions; but this,
like all other general tendencies in history, may be counteracted
or modified by many special circumstances. The law I
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
have mentioned about oxen was obviously one of those that
belong to a very early stage of progress, when legislators are
labouring to form agricultural habits among a warlike and
nomadic people.<note place='foot'>In the same way we find
several chapters in the <hi rend='italic'>Zendavesta</hi>
about the criminality of injuring
dogs; which is explained by the
great importance of shepherd's
dogs to a pastoral people.</note> The games in which the slaughter of
animals bore so large a part, having been introduced but a
little before the extinction of the republic, did very much to
arrest or retard the natural progress of humane sentiments.
In ancient Greece, besides the bull-fights of Thessaly, the
combats of quails and cocks<note place='foot'><p>On the origin of Greek cock-fighting,
see Ælian, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Var.</hi> ii.
28. Many particulars about it are
given by Athenæus. Chrysippus
maintained that cock-fighting was
the final cause of cocks, these birds
being made by Providence in order
to inspire us by the example of
their courage. (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De Repug.
Stoic.</hi>) The Greeks do not, however,
appear to have known <q>cock-throwing,</q>
the favourite English
game of throwing a stick called a
<q>cock-stick</q> at cocks. It was a
very ancient and very popular
amusement, and was practised
especially on Shrove Tuesday, and
by school-boys. Sir Thomas More
had been famous for his skill in it.
(Strutt's <hi rend='italic'>Sports and Pastimes</hi>, p.
283.) Three origins of it have
been given:&mdash;1st, that in the
Danish wars the Saxons failed to
surprise a certain city in consequence
of the crowing of cocks,
and had in consequence a great
hatred of that bird; 2nd, that the
cocks (<foreign rend='italic'>galli</foreign>) were special representatives
of Frenchmen, with
whom the English were constantly
at war; and 3rd, that they were
connected with the denial of St.
Peter. As Sir Charles Sedley
said:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>Mayst thou be punished for St. Peter's crime,<lb/>
And on Shrove Tuesday perish in thy prime.</q>
</p>
<p>
Knight's <hi rend='italic'>Old England</hi>, vol. ii. p.
126.</p></note> were favourite amusements,
and were much encouraged by the legislators, as furnishing
examples of valour to the soldiers. The colossal dimensions
of the Roman games, the circumstances that favoured them,
and the overwhelming interest they speedily excited, I have
described in a former chapter. We have seen, however, that,
notwithstanding the gladiatorial shows, the standard of
humanity towards men was considerably raised during the
Empire. It is also well worthy of notice that, notwithstanding
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
the passion for the combats of wild beasts, Roman literature
and the later literature of the nations subject to Rome abound
in delicate touches displaying in a very high degree a sensitiveness
to the feelings of the animal world. This tender
interest in animal life is one of the most distinctive features
of the poetry of Virgil. Lucretius, who rarely struck the
chords of pathos, had at a still earlier period drawn a very
beautiful picture of the sorrows of the bereaved cow, whose
calf had been sacrificed upon the altar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Natura Rerum</hi>, lib. ii.</note> Plutarch mentions,
incidentally, that he could never bring himself to sell, in its
old age, the ox which had served him faithfully in the time
of its strength.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Life of Marc. Cato.</hi></note> Ovid expressed a similar sentiment with an
almost equal emphasis.<note place='foot'><p><q>Quid meruere boves, animal sine fraude dolisque,<lb/>
Innocuum, simplex, natum tolerare labores?<lb/>
Immemor est demum nec frugum munere dignus.<lb/>
Qui potuit curvi dempto modo pondere aratri<lb/>
Ruricolam mactare suum.</q>&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Metamorph.</hi> xv. 120-124.
</p></note> Juvenal speaks of a Roman lady
with her eyes filled with tears on account of the death of a
sparrow.<note place='foot'><p><q>Cujus<lb/>
Turbavit nitidos extinctus passer ocellos.</q>
</p>
<p>
Juvenal, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vi. 7-8.
</p>
<p>
There is a little poem in Catullus
(iii.) to console his mistress upon
the death of her favourite sparrow;
and Martial more than once alludes
to the pets of the Roman
ladies.
</p>
<p>
Compare the charming description
of the Prioress, in Chaucer:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>She was so charitable and so pitous,<lb/>
She wolde wepe if that she saw a<lb/>
mous Caught in a trappe, if it were ded or bledde.<lb/>
Of smale houndes had she that she fedde<lb/>
With rosted flesh and milke and wastel brede,<lb/>
But sore wept she if one of them were dede,<lb/>
Or if men smote it with a yerde smert:<lb/>
And all was conscience and tendre herte.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Prologue to the <q>Canterbury Tales.</q></hi></p></note> Apollonius of Tyana, on the ground of humanity,
refused, even when invited by a king, to participate in the
chase.<note place='foot'>Philost. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> i. 38.</note> Arrian, the friend of Epictetus, in his book upon
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
coursing, anticipated the beautiful picture which Addison
has drawn of the huntsman refusing to sacrifice the life of
the captured hare which had given him so much pleasure in
its flight.<note place='foot'>See the curious chapter in his
Κυνηγετικός, xvi. and compare it
with No. 116 in the <hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
These touches of feeling, slight as they may appear, indicate,
I think, a vein of sentiment such as we should scarcely
have expected to find coexisting with the gigantic slaughter
of the amphitheatre. The progress, however, was not only
one of sentiment&mdash;it was also shown in distinct and definite
teaching. Pythagoras and Empedocles were quoted as the
founders of this branch of ethics. The moral duty of kindness
to animals was in the first instance based upon a
dogmatic assertion of the transmigration of souls, and, the
doctrine that animals are within the circle of human duty
being thus laid down, subsidiary considerations of humanity
were alleged. The rapid growth of the Pythagorean school,
in the latter days of the Empire, made these considerations
familiar to the people.<note place='foot'>In his <hi rend='italic'>De Abstinentia Carnis</hi>.
The controversy between Origen
and Celsus furnishes us with a
very curious illustration of the
extravagances into which some
Pagans of the third century fell
about animals. Celsus objected to
the Christian doctrine about the
position of men in the universe,
that many of the animals were at
least the equals of men both in
reason, religious feeling, and knowledge.
(Orig. <hi rend='italic'>Cont. Cels.</hi> lib. iv.)</note> Porphyry elaborately advocated,
and even Seneca for a time practised, abstinence from flesh.
But the most remarkable figure in this movement is unquestionably
Plutarch. Casting aside the dogma of transmigration,
or at least speaking of it only as a doubtful conjecture,
he places the duty of kindness to animals on the broad ground
of the affections, and he urges that duty with an emphasis
and a detail to which no adequate parallel can, I believe, be
found in the Christian writings for at least seventeen hundred
years. He condemns absolutely the games of the amphitheatre,
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
dwells with great force upon the effect of such spectacles in
hardening the character, enumerates in detail, and denounces
with unqualified energy, the refined cruelties which gastronomic
fancies had produced, and asserts in the strongest
language that every man has duties to the animal world as
truly as to his fellow-men.<note place='foot'>These views are chiefly defended
in his two tracts on eating
flesh. Plutarch has also recurred
to the subject, incidentally, in several
other works, especially in a very
beautiful passage in his <hi rend='italic'>Life of
Marcus Cato</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
If we now pass to the Christian Church, we shall find
that little or no progress was at first made in this sphere.
Among the Manicheans, it is true, the mixture of Oriental
notions was shown in an absolute prohibition of animal food,
and abstinence from this food was also frequently practised upon
totally different grounds by the orthodox. One or two of the
Fathers have also mentioned with approbation the humane
counsels of the Pythagoreans.<note place='foot'>See, for example, a striking
passage in Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> lib.
ii. St. Clement imagines Pythagoras
had borrowed his sentiments
on this subject from Moses.</note> But, on the other hand, the
doctrine of transmigration was emphatically repudiated by
the Catholics; the human race was isolated, by the scheme
of redemption, more than ever from all other races; and in
the range and circle of duties inculcated by the early Fathers
those to animals had no place. This is indeed the one form
of humanity which appears more prominently in the Old
Testament than in the New. The many beautiful traces of
it in the former, which indicate a sentiment,<note place='foot'>There is, I believe, no record
of any wild beast combats existing
among the Jews, and the rabbinical
writers have been remarkable for
the great emphasis with which they
inculcated the duty of kindness to
animals. See some passages from
them, cited in Wollaston, <hi rend='italic'>Religion
of Nature</hi>, sec. ii., note. Maimonides
believed in a future life for
animals, to recompense them for
their sufferings here. (Bayle, <hi rend='italic'>Dict.</hi>
art, <q>Rorarius D.</q>) There is a
curious collection of the opinions
of different writers on this last point
in a little book called the <hi rend='italic'>Rights
of Animals</hi>, by William Drummond
(London, 1838), pp. 197-205.</note> even where
they do not very strictly define a duty, gave way before an
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
ardent philanthropy which regarded human interests as the
one end, and the relations of man to his Creator as the one
question, of life, and dismissed somewhat contemptuously, as
an idle sentimentalism, notions of duty to animals.<note place='foot'>Thus St. Paul (1 Cor. ix. 9)
turned aside the precept, <q>Thou
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the
ox that treadeth out the corn,</q> from
its natural meaning, with the contemptuous
question, <q>Doth God
take care for oxen?</q></note> A refined
and subtle sympathy with animal feeling is indeed
rarely found among those who are engaged very actively in
the affairs of life, and it was not without a meaning or a
reason that Shakespeare placed that exquisitely pathetic
analysis of the sufferings of the wounded stag, which is perhaps
its most perfect poetical expression, in the midst of the
morbid dreamings of the diseased and melancholy Jacques.
</p>

<p>
But while what are called the rights of animals had no
place in the ethics of the Church, a feeling of sympathy with
the irrational creation was in some degree inculcated indirectly
by the incidents of the hagiology. It was very natural
that the hermit, living in the lonely deserts of the East, or in
the vast forests of Europe, should come into an intimate connection
with the animal world, and it was no less natural that
the popular imagination, when depicting the hermit life,
should make this connection the centre of many picturesque
and sometimes touching legends. The birds, it was said,
stooped in their flight at the old man's call; the lion and the
hyena crouched submissively at his feet; his heart, which
was closed to all human interests, expanded freely at the
sight of some suffering animal; and something of his own
sanctity descended to the companions of his solitude and the
objects of his miracles. The wild beasts attended St. Theon
when he walked abroad, and the saint rewarded them by
giving them drink out of his well. An Egyptian hermit had
made a beautiful garden in the desert, and used to sit beneath
the palm-trees while a lion ate fruit from his hand. When
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
St. Pœmen was shivering in a winter night, a lion crouched
beside him, and became his covering. Lions buried St. Paul
the hermit and St. Mary of Egypt. They appear in the
legends of St. Jerome, St. Gerasimus, St. John the Silent,
St. Simeon, and many others. When an old and feeble monk,
named Zosimas, was on his journey to Cæsarea, with an ass
which bore his possessions, a lion seized and devoured the
ass, but, at the command of the saint, the lion itself carried
the burden to the city gates. St. Helenus called a wild ass
from its herd to bear his burden through the wilderness. The
same saint, as well as St. Pachomius, crossed the Nile on the
back of a crocodile, as St. Scuthinus did the Irish Channel
on a sea monster. Stags continually accompanied saints upon
their journeys, bore their burdens, ploughed their fields, revealed
their relics. The hunted stag was especially the theme
of many picturesque legends. A Pagan, named Branchion,
was once pursuing an exhausted stag, when it took refuge in
a cavern, whose threshold no inducement could persuade the
hounds to cross. The astonished hunter entered, and found
himself in presence of an old hermit, who at once protected
the fugitive and converted the pursuer. In the legends of
St. Eustachius and St. Hubert, Christ is represented as having
assumed the form of a hunted stag, which turned upon its
pursuer, with a crucifix glittering on its brow, and, addressing
him with a human voice, converted him to Christianity. In
the full frenzy of a chase, hounds and stag stopped and knelt
down together to venerate the relics of St. Fingar. On the
festival of St. Regulus, the wild stags assembled at the tomb
of the saint, as the ravens used to do at that of St. Apollinar
of Ravenna. St. Erasmus was the special protector of oxen,
and they knelt down voluntarily before his shrine. St. Antony
was the protector of hogs, who were usually introduced
into his pictures. St. Bridget kept pigs, and a wild boar came
from the forest to subject itself to her rule. A horse foreshadowed
by its lamentations the death of St. Columba. The
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
three companions of St. Colman were a cock, a mouse, and a
fly. The cock announced the hour of devotion, the mouse
bit the ear of the drowsy saint till he got up, and if in the
course of his studies he was afflicted by any wandering
thoughts, or called away to other business, the fly alighted
on the line where he had left off, and kept the place. Legends,
not without a certain whimsical beauty, described the
moral qualities existing in animals. A hermit was accustomed
to share his supper with a wolf, which, one evening
entering the cell before the return of the master, stole a
loaf of bread. Struck with remorse, it was a week before it
ventured again to visit the cell, and when it did so, its head
hung down, and its whole demeanour manifested the most
profound contrition. The hermit <q>stroked with a gentle
hand its bowed down head,</q> and gave it a double portion as
a token of forgiveness. A lioness knelt down with lamentations
before another saint, and then led him to its cub, which
was blind, but which received its sight at the prayer of the
saint. Next day the lioness returned, bearing the skin of a
wild beast as a mark of its gratitude. Nearly the same thing
happened to St. Macarius of Alexandria; a hyena knocked
at his door, brought its young, which was blind, and which
the saint restored to sight, and repaid the obligation soon
afterwards by bringing a fleece of wool. <q>O hyena!</q> said
the saint, <q>how did you obtain this fleece? you must have
stolen and eaten a sheep.</q> Full of shame, the hyena hung its
head down, but persisted in offering its gift, which, however,
the holy man refused to receive till the hyena <q>had sworn</q>
to cease for the future to rob. The hyena bowed its head in
token of its acceptance of the oath, and St. Macarius afterwards
gave the fleece to St. Melania. Other legends simply
speak of the sympathy between saints and the irrational
world. The birds came at the call of St. Cuthbert, and a dead
bird was resuscitated by his prayer. When St. Aengussius,
in felling wood, had cut his hand, the birds gathered round,
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
and with loud cries lamented his misfortune. A little bird,
struck down and mortally wounded by a hawk, fell at the
feet of St. Kieranus, who shed tears as he looked upon its
torn breast, and offered up a prayer, upon which the bird
was instantly healed.<note place='foot'>I have taken these illustrations
from the collection of hermit
literature in Rosweyde, from different
volumes of the Bollandists,
from the <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> of Sulpicius
Severus, and from what is perhaps
the most interesting of all collections
of saintly legends, Colgan's
<hi rend='italic'>Acta Sanctorum Hiberniæ</hi>. M.
Alfred Maury, in his most valuable
work, <hi rend='italic'>Légendes pieuses du Moyen
Age</hi>, has examined minutely the
part played by animals in symbolising
virtues and vices, and has
shown the way in which the same
incidents were repeated, with slight
variations, in different legends. M.
de Montalembert has devoted what
is probably the most beautiful
chapter of his <hi rend='italic'>Moines d'Occident</hi>
(<q>Les Moines et la Nature</q>) to the
relations of monks to the animal
world; but the numerous legends
he cites are all, with one or two
exceptions, different from those I
have given.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many hundreds, I should perhaps hardly exaggerate were
I to say many thousands, of legends of this kind exist in the
lives of the saints. Suggested in the first instance by that
desert life which was at once the earliest phase of monachism
and one of the earliest sources of Christian mythology,
strengthened by the symbolism which represented different
virtues and vices under the forms of animals, and by the
reminiscences of the rites and the superstitions of Paganism,
the connection between men and animals became the keynote
of an infinite variety of fantastic tales. In our eyes
they may appear extravagantly puerile, yet it will scarcely, I
hope, be necessary to apologise for introducing them into
what purports to be a grave work, when it is remembered
that for many centuries they were universally accepted by
mankind, and were so interwoven with all local traditions,
and with all the associations of education, that they at once
determined and reflected the inmost feelings of the heart.
Their tendency to create a certain feeling of sympathy towards
animals is manifest, and this is probably the utmost
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
the Catholic Church has done in that direction.<note place='foot'>Chateaubriand speaks, however
(<hi rend='italic'>Études historiques</hi>, étude vi<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi>,
1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>re</hi> partie), of an old Gallic law,
forbidding to throw a stone at an
ox attached to the plough, or to
make its yoke too tight.</note> A very
few authentic instances may, indeed, be cited of saints whose
natural gentleness of disposition was displayed in kindness to
the animal world. Of St. James of Venice&mdash;an obscure saint
of the thirteenth century&mdash;it is told that he was accustomed to
buy and release the birds with which Italian boys used to play
by attaching them to strings, saying that <q>he pitied the little
birds of the Lord,</q> and that his <q>tender charity recoiled from
all cruelty, even to the most diminutive of animals.</q><note place='foot'>Bollandists, May 31. Leonardo
da Vinci is said to have had
the same fondness for buying and
releasing caged birds, and (to go
back a long way) Pythagoras to
have purchased one day, near Metapontus,
from some fishermen all
the fish in their net, that he might
have the pleasure of releasing
them. (Apuleius, <hi rend='italic'>Apologia</hi>.)</note> St.
Francis of Assisi was a more conspicuous example of the same
spirit. <q>If I could only be presented to the emperor,</q> he used
to say, <q>I would pray him, for the love of God, and of me, to
issue an edict prohibiting any one from catching or imprisoning
my sisters the larks, and ordering that all who have oxen
or asses should at Christmas feed them particularly well.</q> A
crowd of legends turning upon this theme were related of
him. A wolf, near Gubbio, being adjured by him, promised
to abstain from eating sheep, placed its paw in the hand of
the saint to ratify the promise, and was afterwards fed from
house to house by the inhabitants of the city. A crowd of
birds, on another occasion, came to hear the saint preach, as
fish did to hear St. Antony of Padua. A falcon awoke him
at his hour of prayer. A grasshopper encouraged him by her
melody to sing praises to God. The noisy swallows kept
silence when he began to teach.<note place='foot'>See these legends collected by
Hase (<hi rend='italic'>St Francis. Assisi</hi>). It is
said of Cardinal Bellarmine that
he used to allow vermin to bite
him, saying, <q>We shall have
heaven to reward us for our sufferings,
but these poor creatures have
nothing but the enjoyment of this
present life.</q> (Bayle, <hi rend='italic'>Dict. philos.</hi>
art. <q>Bellarmine.</q>)</note>
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
On the whole, however, Catholicism has done very little
to inculcate humanity to animals. The fatal vice of theologians,
who have always looked upon others solely through
the medium of their own special dogmatic views, has been
an obstacle to all advance in this direction. The animal
world, being altogether external to the scheme of redemption,
was regarded as beyond the range of duty, and the belief
that we have any kind of obligation to its members has never
been inculcated&mdash;has never, I believe, been even admitted&mdash;by
Catholic theologians. In the popular legends, and in the
recorded traits of individual amiability, it is curious to observe
how constantly those who have sought to inculcate
kindness to animals have done so by endeavouring to associate
them with something distinctively Christian. The
legends I have noticed glorified them as the companions of
the saints. The stag was honoured as especially commissioned
to reveal the relics of saints, and as the deadly enemy
of the serpent. In the feast of asses, that animal was led
with veneration into the churches, and a rude hymn proclaimed
its dignity, because it had borne Christ in His flight
to Egypt, and in His entry into Jerusalem. St. Francis
always treated lambs with a peculiar tenderness, as being
symbols of his Master. Luther grew sad and thoughtful
at a hare hunt, for it seemed to him to represent the pursuit
of souls by the devil. Many popular legends exist, associating
some bird or animal with some incident in the evangelical
narrative, and securing for them in consequence an
unmolested life. But such influences have never extended
far. There are two distinct objects which may be considered
by moralists in this sphere. They may regard the character
of the men, or they may regard the sufferings of the animals.
The amount of callousness or of conscious cruelty displayed
or elicited by amusements or practices that inflict suffering
on animals, bears no kind of proportion to the intensity of
that suffering. Could we follow with adequate realisation
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
the pangs of the wounded birds that are struck down in our
sports, or of the timid hare in the long course of its flight,
we should probably conclude that they were not really less
than those caused by the Spanish bull-fight, or by the English
pastimes of the last century. But the excitement of the
chase refracts the imagination, and owing to the diminutive
size of the victim, and the undemonstrative character of its
suffering, these sports do not exercise that prejudicial influence
upon character which they would exercise if the
sufferings of the animals were vividly realised, and were at
the same time accepted as an element of the enjoyment.
The class of amusements of which the ancient combats of
wild beasts form the type, have no doubt nearly disappeared
from Christendom, and it is possible that the softening power
of Christian teaching may have had some indirect influence
in abolishing them; but a candid judgment will confess that
it has been very little. During the periods, and in the
countries, in which theological influence was supreme, they
were unchallenged.<note place='foot'>I have noticed, in my <hi rend='italic'>History
of Rationalism</hi>, that, although some
Popes did undoubtedly try to suppress
Spanish bull-fights, this was
solely on account of the destruction
of human life they caused. Full
details on this subject will be found
in Concina, <hi rend='italic'>De Spectaculis</hi> (Romæ,
1752). Bayle says, <q>Il n'y a point
de casuiste qui croie qu'on pèche
en faisant combattre des taureaux
contre des dogues,</q> &amp;c. (<hi rend='italic'>Dict.
philos.</hi> <q>Rorarius, C.</q>)</note> They disappeared<note place='foot'>On the ancient amusements of
England the reader may consult
Seymour's <hi rend='italic'>Survey of London</hi>
(1734), vol. i. pp. 227-235;
Strutt's <hi rend='italic'>Sports and Pastimes of the
English People</hi>. Cock-fighting was
a favourite children's amusement
in England as early as the twelfth
century. (Hampson's <hi rend='italic'>Medii Ævi
Kalendarii</hi>, vol. i. p. 160.) It was,
with foot-ball and several other
amusements, for a time suppressed
by Edward III., on the ground
that they were diverting the people
from archery, which was necessary
to the military greatness of England.</note> at last, because a
luxurious and industrial civilisation involved a refinement of
manners; because a fastidious taste recoiled with a sensation
of disgust from pleasures that an uncultivated taste
would keenly relish; because the drama, at once reflecting
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
and accelerating the change, gave a new form to popular
amusements, and because, in consequence of this revolution,
the old pastimes, being left to the dregs of society, became
the occasions of scandalous disorders.<note place='foot'>The decline of these amusements
in England began with the
great development of the theatre
under Elizabeth. An order of the
Privy Council in July, 1591, prohibits
the exhibition of plays on
Thursday, because on Thursdays
bear-baiting and suchlike pastimes
had been usually practised, and an
injunction to the same effect was
sent to the Lord Mayor, wherein it
was stated that, <q>in divers places
the players do use to recite their
plays, to the great hurt and destruction
of the game of bear-baiting
and like pastimes, which
are maintained for Her Majesty's
pleasure.</q>&mdash;Nichols, <hi rend='italic'>Progresses of
Queen Elizabeth</hi> (ed. 1823), vol. i.
p. 438. The reader will remember
the picture in <hi rend='italic'>Kenilworth</hi> of the
Earl of Sussex petitioning Elizabeth
against Shakespeare, on the
ground of his plays distracting men
from bear-baiting. Elizabeth (see
Nichols) was extremely fond of
bear-baiting. James I. especially
delighted in cock-fighting, and in
1610 was present at a great fight
between a lion and a bear. (Hone,
<hi rend='italic'>Every Day Book</hi>, vol. i. pp. 255-299.)
The theatres, however, rapidly
multiplied, and a writer who
lived about 1629 said, <q>that no less
than seventeen playhouses had been
built in or about London within
threescore years.</q> (Seymour's <hi rend='italic'>Survey</hi>,
vol. i. p. 229.) The Rebellion
suppressed all public amusements,
and when they were re-established
after the Restoration, it was found
that the tastes of the better classes
no longer sympathised with the
bear-garden. Pepys (<hi rend='italic'>Diary</hi>, August
14, 1666) speaks of bull-baiting as
<q>a very rude and nasty pleasure,</q>
and says he had not been in the
bear-garden for many years. Evelyn
(<hi rend='italic'>Diary</hi>, June 16, 1670), having
been present at these shows, describes
them as <q>butcherly sports,
or rather barbarous cruelties,</q> and
says he had not visited them before
for twenty years. A paper in the
<hi rend='italic'>Spectator</hi> (No. 141, written in 1711)
talks of those who <q>seek their
diversion at the bear-garden, ...
where reason and good manners
have no right to disturb them.</q> In
1751, however, Lord Kames was
able to say, <q>The bear garden,
which is one of the chief entertainments
of the English, is held in
abhorrence by the French and other
polite nations.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Essay on Morals</hi>
(1st ed.), p. 7; and he warmly
defends (p. 30) the English taste.
During the latter half of the last
century there was constant controversy
on the subject (which may
be traced in the pages of the <hi rend='italic'>Annual
Register</hi>), and several forgotten
clergymen published sermons
upon it, and the frequent riots
resulting from the fact that the
bear-gardens had become the resort
of the worst classes assisted the
movement. The London magistrates
took measures to suppress
cock-throwing in 1769 (Hampson's
<hi rend='italic'>Med. Æv. Kalend.</hi> p. 160); but
bull-baiting continued far into the
present century. Windham and
Canning strongly defended it; Dr.
Parr is said to have been fond of it
(<hi rend='italic'>Southey's Commonplace Book</hi>, vol.
iv. p. 585); and as late as 1824,
Sir Robert (then Mr) Peel argued
strongly against its prohibition.
(<hi rend='italic'>Parliamentary Debates</hi>, vol. x.
pp. 132-133, 491-495.)</note> In Protestant
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
countries the clergy have, on the whole, sustained this movement.
In Catholic countries it has been much more faithfully
represented by the school of Voltaire and Beccaria. A
judicious moralist may, however, reasonably question whether
amusements which derive their zest from a display of the
natural ferocious instincts of animals, and which substitute
death endured in the frenzy of combat for death in the
remote slaughter-house or by the slow process of decay, have
added in any appreciable degree to the sum of animal
misery, and in these cases he will dwell less upon the suffering
inflicted than upon the injurious influence the spectacle
may sometimes exercise on the character of the spectator.
But there are forms of cruelty which must be regarded in a
different light. The horrors of vivisection, often so wantonly,
so needlessly practised,<note place='foot'>Bacon, in an account of the
deficiencies of medicine, recommends
vivisection in terms that
seem to imply that it was not
practised in his time. <q>As for the
passages and pores, it is true, which
was anciently noted, that the more
subtle of them appear not in anatomies,
because they are shut and
latent in dead bodies, though they
be open and manifest in live;
which being supposed, though the
inhumanity of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>anatomia vivorum</foreign>
was by Celsus justly reproved, yet,
in regard of the great use of this
observation, the enquiry needed
not by him so slightly to have been
relinquished altogether, or referred
to the casual practices of surgery;
but might have been well diverted
upon the dissection of beasts alive,
which, notwithstanding the dissimilitude
of their parts, may
sufficiently satisfy this enquiry.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Advancement
of Learning</hi>, x. 4.
Harvey speaks of vivisections as
having contributed to lead him to
the discovery of the circulation of the
blood. (Acland's <hi rend='italic'>Harveian Oration</hi>
(1865), p. 55.) Bayle, describing
the treatment of animals by men,
says, <q>Nous fouillons dans leurs
entrailles pendant leur vie afin de
satisfaire notre curiosité.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dict.
philos.</hi> art. <q>Rorarius, C.</q> Public
opinion in England was very
strongly directed to the subject in
the present century, by the atrocious
cruelties perpetrated by Majendie
at his lectures. See a most
frightful account of them in a
speech by Mr. Martin (an eccentric
Irish member, who was generally
ridiculed during his life, and has
been almost forgotten since his
death, but to whose untiring exertions
the legislative protection
of animals in England is due).&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Parliament.
Hist.</hi> vol. xii. p. 652.
Mandeville, in his day, was a very
strong advocate of kindness to
animals.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Commentary on the Fable
of the Bees.</hi></note> the prolonged and atrocious tortures,
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
sometimes inflicted in order to procure some gastronomic delicacy,
are so far removed from the public gaze that they
exercise little influence on the character of men. Yet no
humane man can reflect upon them without a shudder. To
bring these things within the range of ethics, to create the
notion of duties towards the animal world, has, so far as
Christian countries are concerned, been one of the peculiar
merits of the last century, and, for the most part, of Protestant
nations. However fully we may recognise the humane
spirit transmitted to the world in the form of legends from
the saints of the desert, it must not be forgotten that the inculcation
of humanity to animals on a wide scale is mainly
the work of a recent and a secular age; that the Mohammedans
and the Brahmins have in this sphere considerably
surpassed the Christians, and that Spain and Southern Italy,
in which Catholicism has most deeply planted its roots, are
even now, probably beyond all other countries in Europe,
those in which inhumanity to animals is most wanton and
most unrebuked.
</p>

<p>
The influence the first form of monachism has exercised
upon the world, so far as it has been beneficial, has been
chiefly through the imagination, which has been fascinated by
its legends. In the great periods of theological controversy,
the Eastern monks had furnished some leading theologians;
but in general, in Oriental lands, the hermit life predominated,
and extreme maceration was the chief merit of the saint.
But in the West, monachism assumed very different forms,
and exercised far higher functions. At first the Oriental
saints were the ideals of Western monks. The Eastern St.
Athanasius had been the founder of Italian monachism. St.
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
Martin of Tours excluded labour from the discipline of his
monks, and he and they, like the Eastern saints, were accustomed
to wander abroad, destroying the idols of the temples.<note place='foot'>See his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> by Sulpicius Severus.</note>
But three great causes conspired to direct the monastic spirit
in the West into practical channels. Conditions of race and
climate have ever impelled the inhabitants of these lands
to active life, and have at the same time rendered them
constitutionally incapable of enduring the austerities or
enjoying the hallucinations of the sedentary Oriental. There
arose, too, in the sixth century, a great legislator, whose form
may be dimly traced through a cloud of fantastic legends, and
the order of St. Benedict, with that of St. Columba and some
others, founded on substantially the same principle, soon ramified
through the greater part of Europe, tempered the wild
excesses of useless penances, and, making labour an essential
part of the monastic system, directed the movement to the
purposes of general civilisation. In the last place, the barbarian
invasions, and the dissolution of the Western Empire,
dislocating the whole system of government and almost resolving
society into its primitive elements, naturally threw
upon the monastic corporations social, political, and intellectual
functions of the deepest importance.
</p>

<p>
It has been observed that the capture of Rome by Alaric,
involving as it did the destruction of the grandest religious
monuments of Paganism, in fact established in that city the
supreme authority of Christianity.<note place='foot'>Milman.</note> A similar remark may
be extended to the general downfall of the Western civilisation.
In that civilisation Christianity had indeed been
legally enthroned; but the philosophies and traditions of
Paganism, and the ingrained habits of an ancient, and at
the same time an effete society, continually paralysed its
energies. What Europe would have been without the barbarian
invasions, we may partly divine from the history of
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
the Lower Empire, which represented, in fact, the old Roman
civilisation prolonged and Christianised. The barbarian
conquests, breaking up the old organisation, provided the
Church with a virgin soil, and made it, for a long period,
the supreme and indeed sole centre of civilisation.
</p>

<p>
It would be difficult to exaggerate the skill and courage
displayed by the ecclesiastics in this most trying period.
We have already seen the noble daring with which they
interfered between the conqueror and the vanquished, and
the unwearied charity with which they sought to alleviate
the unparalleled sufferings of Italy, when the colonial supplies
of corn were cut off, and when the fairest plains were
desolated by the barbarians. Still more wonderful is the
rapid conversion of the barbarian tribes. Unfortunately
this, which is one of the most important, is also one of the
most obscure pages in the history of the Church. Of whole
tribes or nations it may be truly said that we are absolutely
ignorant of the cause of their change. The Goths had
already been converted by Ulphilas, before the downfall
of the Empire, and the conversion of the Germans and of
several northern nations was long posterior to it; but the
great work of Christianising the barbarian world was accomplished
almost in the hour when that world became supreme.
Rude tribes, accustomed in their own lands to pay absolute
obedience to their priests, found themselves in a foreign
country, confronted by a priesthood far more civilised and
imposing than that which they had left, by gorgeous ceremonies,
well fitted to entice, and by threats of coming judgment,
well fitted to scare their imaginations. Disconnected
from all their old associations, they bowed before the majesty
of civilisation, and the Latin religion, like the Latin language,
though with many adulterations, reigned over the
new society. The doctrine of exclusive salvation, and the
doctrine of dæmons, had an admirable missionary power.
The first produced an ardour of proselytising which the
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
polytheist could never rival; while the Pagan, who was
easily led to recognise the Christian God, was menaced with
eternal fire if he did not take the further step of breaking
off from his old divinities. The second dispensed the convert
from the perhaps impossible task of disbelieving his
former religion, for it was only necessary for him to degrade
it, attributing its prodigies to infernal beings. The priests,
in addition to their noble devotion, carried into their missionary
efforts the most masterly judgment. The barbarian
tribes usually followed without enquiry the religion of their
sovereign; and it was to the conversion of the king, and
still more to the conversion of the queen, that the Christians
devoted all their energies. Clotilda, the wife of Clovis,
Bertha, the wife of Ethelbert, and Theodolinda, the wife of
Lothaire, were the chief instruments in converting their
husbands and their nations. Nothing that could affect the
imagination was neglected. It is related of Clotilda, that
she was careful to attract her husband by the rich draperies
of the ecclesiastical ceremonies.<note place='foot'>Greg. Turon. ii. 29.</note> In another case, the first
work of proselytising was confided to an artist, who painted
before the terrified Pagans the last judgment and the torments
of hell.<note place='foot'>This was the first step towards
the conversion of the Bulgarians.&mdash;Milman's
<hi rend='italic'>Latin Christianity</hi>, vol.
iii. p. 249.</note> But especially the belief, which was sincerely
held, and sedulously inculcated, that temporal success followed
in the train of Christianity, and that every pestilence,
famine, or military disaster was the penalty of idolatry,
heresy, sacrilege, or vice, assisted the movement. The theory
was so wide, that it met every variety of fortune, and being
taught with consummate skill, to barbarians who were
totally destitute of all critical power, and strongly predisposed
to accept it, it proved extremely efficacious; and hope,
fear, gratitude, and remorse drew multitudes into the Church.
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
The transition was softened by the substitution of Christian
ceremonies and saints for the festivals and the divinities of
the Pagans.<note place='foot'>A remarkable collection of instances
of this kind is given by
Ozanam, <hi rend='italic'>Civilisation in the Fifth
Century</hi> (Eng. trans.), vol. i. pp.
124-127.</note> Besides the professed missionaries, the Christian
captives zealously diffused their faith among their Pagan
masters. When the chieftain had been converted, and the
army had followed his profession, an elaborate monastic
and ecclesiastical organisation grew up to consolidate the
conquest, and repressive laws soon crushed all opposition to
the faith.
</p>

<p>
In these ways the victory of Christianity over the barbarian
world was achieved. But that victory, though very
great, was less decisive than might appear. A religion which
professed to be Christianity, and which contained many of
the ingredients of pure Christianity, had risen into the
ascendant, but it had undergone a profound modification
through the struggle. Religions, as well as worshippers, had
been baptised. The festivals, images, and names of saints
had been substituted for those of the idols, and the habits of
thought and feeling of the ancient faith reappeared in new
forms and a new language. The tendency to a material,
idolatrous, and polytheistic faith, which had long been encouraged
by the monks, and which the heretics Jovinian,
Vigilantius, and Aerius had vainly resisted, was fatally
strengthened by the infusion of a barbarian element into the
Church, by the general depression of intellect in Europe, and
by the many accommodations that were made to facilitate conversion.
Though apparently defeated and crushed, the old
gods still retained, under a new faith, no small part of their
influence over the world.
</p>

<p>
To this tendency the leaders of the Church made in
general no resistance, though in another form they were
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
deeply persuaded of the vitality of the old gods. Many
curious and picturesque legends attest the popular belief that
the old Roman and the old barbarian divinities, in their
capacity of dæmons, were still waging an unrelenting war
against the triumphant faith. A great Pope of the sixth
century relates how a Jew, being once benighted on his
journey, and finding no other shelter for the night, lay down
to rest in an abandoned temple of Apollo. Shuddering at
the loneliness of the building, and fearing the dæmons who
were said to haunt it, he determined, though not a Christian,
to protect himself by the sign of the cross, which he had
often heard possessed a mighty power against spirits. To
that sign he owed his safety. For at midnight the temple
was filled with dark and threatening forms. The god Apollo
was holding his court at his deserted shrine, and his attendant
dæmons were recounting the temptations they had devised
against the Christians.<note place='foot'>St. Gregory, <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> iii. 7. The
particular temptation the Jew heard
discussed was that of the bishop of
the diocese, who, under the instigation
of one of the dæmons, was
rapidly falling in love with a nun,
and had proceeded so far as jocosely
to stroke her on the back. The Jew,
having related the vision to the
bishop, the latter reformed his
manners, the Jew became a Christian,
and the temple was turned
into a church.</note> A newly married Roman, when one
day playing ball, took off his wedding-ring, which he found
an impediment in the game, and he gaily put it on the finger
of a statue of Venus, that was standing near. When he
returned, the marble finger had bent so that it was impossible
to withdraw the ring, and that night the goddess appeared to
him in a dream, and told him that she was now his wedded
wife, and that she would abide with him for ever.<note place='foot'>William of Malmesbury, ii. 13.</note> When
the Irish missionary St. Gall was fishing one night upon a
Swiss lake, near which he had planted a monastery, he heard
strange voices sweeping over the lonely deep. The Spirit of
the Water and the Spirit of the Mountains were consulting
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
together how they could expel the intruder who had disturbed
their ancient reign.<note place='foot'>See Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>, vol. ii. p. 293.</note>
</p>

<p>
The details of the rapid propagation of Western monachism
have been amply treated by many historians, and
the causes of its success are sufficiently manifest. Some of
the reasons I have assigned for the first spread of asceticism
continued to operate, while others of a still more powerful
kind had arisen. The rapid decomposition of the entire Roman
Empire by continuous invasions of barbarians rendered the
existence of an inviolable asylum and centre of peaceful
labour a matter of transcendent importance, and the monastery
as organised by St. Benedict soon combined the most
heterogeneous elements of attraction. It was at once eminently
aristocratic and intensely democratic. The power and
princely position of the abbot were coveted, and usually
obtained, by members of the most illustrious families; while
emancipated serfs, or peasants who had lost their all in the
invasions, or were harassed by savage nobles, or had fled from
military service, or desired to lead a more secure and easy
life, found in the monastery an unfailing refuge. The institution
exercised all the influence of great wealth, expended
for the most part with great charity, while the monk himself
was invested with the aureole of a sacred poverty. To
ardent and philanthropic natures, the profession opened
boundless vistas of missionary, charitable, and civilising
activity. To the superstitious it was the plain road to
heaven. To the ambitious it was the portal to bishoprics,
and, after the monk St. Gregory, not unfrequently to the
Popedom. To the studious it offered the only opportunity
then existing in the world of seeing many books and passing
a life of study. To the timid and retiring it afforded the
most secure, and probably the least laborious life a poor
peasant could hope to find. Vast as were the multitudes
that thronged the monasteries, the means for their support
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
were never wanting. The belief that gifts or legacies to a
monastery opened the doors of heaven was in a superstitious
age sufficient to secure for the community an almost boundless
wealth, which was still further increased by the skill and
perseverance with which the monks tilled the waste lands, by
the exemption of their domains from all taxation, and by the
tranquillity which in the most turbulent ages they usually
enjoyed. In France, the Low Countries, and Germany they
were pre-eminently agriculturists. Gigantic forests were
felled, inhospitable marshes reclaimed, barren plains cultivated
by their hands. The monastery often became the nucleus
of a city. It was the centre of civilisation and industry,
the symbol of moral power in an age of turbulence and war.
</p>

<p>
It must be observed, however, that the beneficial influence
of the monastic system was necessarily transitional, and the
subsequent corruption the normal and inevitable result of its
constitution. Vast societies living in enforced celibacy,
exercising an unbounded influence, and possessing enormous
wealth, must necessarily have become hotbeds of corruption
when the enthusiasm that had created them expired. The
services they rendered as the centres of agriculture, the
refuge of travellers, the sanctuaries in war, the counterpoise
of the baronial castle, were no longer required when the convulsions
of invasion had ceased and when civil society was
definitely organised. And a similar observation may be
extended even to their moral type. Thus, while it is undoubtedly
true that the Benedictine monks, by making
labour an essential element of their discipline, did very much
to efface the stigma which slavery had affixed upon it, it is
also true that, when industry had passed out of its initial
stage, the monastic theories of the sanctity of poverty, and the
evil of wealth, were its most deadly opponents. The dogmatic
condemnation by theologians of loans at interest, which
are the basis of industrial enterprise, was the expression of a
far deeper antagonism of tendencies and ideals.
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
In one important respect, the transition from the eremite
to the monastic life involved not only a change of circumstances,
but also a change of character. The habit of
obedience, and the virtue of humility, assumed a position
which they had never previously occupied. The conditions
of the hermit life contributed to develop to a very high
degree a spirit of independence and spiritual pride, which was
still further increased by a curious habit that existed in the
Church of regarding each eminent hermit as the special model
or professor of some particular virtue, and making pilgrimages
to him, in order to study this aspect of his character.<note place='foot'>Cassian. <hi rend='italic'>Cœnob. Instit.</hi> v. 4.
See, too, some striking instances of
this in the life of St. Antony.</note>
These pilgrimages, combined with the usually solitary and
self-sufficing life of the hermit, and also with the habit of
measuring progress almost entirely by the suppression of a
physical appetite, which it is quite possible wholly to destroy,
very naturally produced an extreme arrogance.<note place='foot'>This spiritual pride is well
noticed by Neander, <hi rend='italic'>Ecclesiastical
History</hi> (Bohn's ed.), vol. iii. pp.
321-323. It appears in many
traits scattered through the lives of
these saints. I have already cited
the visions telling St. Antony and
St. Macarius that they were not the
best of living people; and also the
case of the hermit, who was deceived
by a devil in the form of a woman, because
he had been exalted by pride.
Another hermit, being very holy,
received pure white bread every
day from heaven, but, being extravagantly
elated, the bread got worse
and worse till it became perfectly
black. (Tillemont, tome x. pp.
27-28.) A certain Isidore affirmed
that he had not been conscious of
sin, even in thought, for forty years.
(Socrates, iv. 23.) It was a saying
of St. Antony, that a solitary man
in the desert is free from three
wars&mdash;of sight, speech, and hearing:
he has to combat only fornication.
(<hi rend='italic'>Apothegmata Patrum.</hi>)</note> But in the
highly organised and disciplined monasteries of the West,
passive obedience and humility were the very first things
that were inculcated. The monastery, beyond all other institutions,
was the school for their exercise; and as the monk
represented the highest moral ideal of the age, obedience and
humility acquired a new value in the minds of men. Nearly
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
all the feudal and other organisations that arose out of the
chaos that followed the destruction of the Roman Empire
were intimately related to the Church, not simply because
the Church was the strongest power in Christendom, and
supplied in itself an admirable model of an organised body,
but also because it had done much to educate men in habits
of obedience. The special value of this education depended
upon the peculiar circumstances of the time. The ancient
civilisations, and especially that of Rome, had been by no
means deficient in those habits; but it was in the midst of
the dissolution of an old society, and of the ascendancy of
barbarians, who exaggerated to the highest degree their personal
independence, that the Church proposed to the reverence
of mankind a life of passive obedience as the highest ideal of
virtue.
</p>

<p>
The habit of obedience was no new thing in the world,
but the disposition of humility was pre-eminently and almost
exclusively a Christian virtue; and there has probably never
been any sphere in which it has been so largely and so successfully
inculcated as in the monastery. The whole penitential
discipline, the entire mode or tenor of the monastic life,
was designed to tame every sentiment of pride, and to give
humility a foremost place in the hierarchy of virtues. We
have here one great source of the mollifying influence of
Catholicism. The gentler virtues&mdash;benevolence and amiability&mdash;may,
and in an advanced civilisation often do, subsist
in natures that are completely devoid of genuine humility;
but, on the other hand, it is scarcely possible for a nature to
be pervaded by a deep sentiment of humility without this
sentiment exercising a softening influence over the whole
character. To transform a fierce warlike nature into a
character of a gentler type, the first essential is to awaken
this feeling. In the monasteries, the extinction of social and
domestic feelings, the narrow corporate spirit, and, still more,
the atrocious opinions that were prevalent concerning the
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
guilt of heresy, produced in many minds an extreme and most
active ferocity; but the practice of charity, and the ideal of
humility, never failed to exercise some softening influence
upon Christendom.
</p>

<p>
But, however advantageous the temporary pre-eminence
of this moral type may have been, it was obviously unsuited
for a later stage of civilisation. Political liberty is almost
impossible where the monastic system is supreme, not merely
because the monasteries divert the energies of the nation from
civic to ecclesiastical channels, but also because the monastic
ideal is the very apotheosis of servitude. Catholicism has
been admirably fitted at once to mitigate and to perpetuate
despotism. When men have learnt to reverence a life of
passive, unreasoning obedience as the highest type of perfection,
the enthusiasm and passion of freedom necessarily decline.
In this respect there is an analogy between the monastic and
the military spirit, both of which promote and glorify passive
obedience, and therefore prepare the minds of men for despotic
rule; but, on the whole, the monastic spirit is probably
more hostile to freedom than the military spirit, for the obedience
of the monk is based upon humility, while the obedience
of the soldier coexists with pride. Now, a considerable
measure of pride, or self-assertion, is an invariable characteristic
of free communities.
</p>

<p>
The ascendancy which the monastic system gave to the
virtue of humility has not continued. This virtue is indeed
the crowning grace and beauty of the most perfect characters
of the saintly type; but experience has shown that among
common men humility is more apt to degenerate into servility
than pride into arrogance; and modern moralists have
appealed more successfully to the sense of dignity than to
the opposite feeling. Two of the most important steps of
later moral history have consisted of the creation of a sentiment
of pride as the parent and the guardian of many virtues.
The first of these encroachments on the monastic
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
spirit was chivalry, which called into being a proud and
jealous military honour that has never since been extinguished.
The second was the creation of that feeling of
self-respect which is one of the most remarkable characteristics
that distinguish Protestant from the most Catholic populations,
and which has proved among the former an invaluable
moral agent, forming frank and independent natures,
and checking every servile habit and all mean and degrading
vice.<note place='foot'><q>Pride, under such training
[that of modern rationalistic philosophy],
instead of running to waste,
is turned to account. It gets a
new name; it is called self-respect....
It is directed into the channel
of industry, frugality, honesty, and
obedience, and it becomes the very
staple of the religion and morality
held in honour in a day like our
own. It becomes the safeguard of
chastity, the guarantee of veracity,
in high and low; it is the very
household god of the Protestant,
inspiring neatness and decency in
the servant-girl, propriety of carriage
and refined manners in her
mistress, uprightness, manliness,
and generosity in the head of the
family.... It is the stimulating
principle of providence on the one
hand, and of free expenditure on
the other; of an honourable ambition
and of elegant enjoyment.</q>&mdash;Newman,
<hi rend='italic'>On University Education</hi>,
Discourse ix. In the same lecture
(which is, perhaps, the most beautiful
of the many beautiful productions
of its illustrious author),
Dr. Newman describes, with admirable
eloquence, the manner in
which modesty has supplanted
humility in the modern type of
excellence. It is scarcely necessary
to say that the lecturer strongly
disapproves of the movement he
describes.</note> The peculiar vigour with which it has been developed
in Protestant countries may be attributed to the suppression
of monastic institutions and habits; to the stigma Protestantism
has attached to mendicancy, which Catholicism has
usually glorified and encouraged; to the high place Protestantism
has accorded to private judgment and personal responsibility;
and lastly, to the action of free political institutions,
which have taken deepest root where the principles
of the Reformation have been accepted.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
The relation of the monasteries to the intellectual virtues,
which we have next to examine, opens out a wide field of
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
discussion; and, in order to appreciate it, it will be necessary
to revert briefly to a somewhat earlier stage of ecclesiastical
history. And in the first place, it may be observed, that the
phrase intellectual virtue, which is often used in a metaphorical
sense, is susceptible of a strictly literal interpretation.
If a sincere and active desire for truth be a moral duty, the
discipline and the dispositions that are plainly involved in
every honest search fall rigidly within the range of ethics.
To love truth sincerely means to pursue it with an earnest,
conscientious, unflagging zeal. It means to be prepared to
follow the light of evidence even to the most unwelcome
conclusions; to labour earnestly to emancipate the mind from
early prejudices; to resist the current of the desires, and the
refracting influence of the passions; to proportion on all occasions
conviction to evidence, and to be ready, if need be, to
exchange the calm of assurance for all the suffering of a perplexed
and disturbed mind. To do this is very difficult and
very painful; but it is clearly involved in the notion of
earnest love of truth. If, then, any system stigmatises as
criminal the state of doubt, denounces the examination of
some one class of arguments or facts, seeks to introduce the
bias of the affections into the enquiries of the reason, or
regards the honest conclusion of an upright investigator as
involving moral guilt, that system is subversive of intellectual
honesty.
</p>

<p>
Among the ancients, although the methods of enquiry
were often very faulty, and generalisations very hasty, a respect
for the honest search after truth was widely diffused.<note place='foot'>Thus <q>indagatio veri</q> was
reckoned among the leading virtues,
and the high place given to σοφία
and <q>prudentia</q> in ethical writings
preserved the notion of the moral
duties connected with the discipline
of the intellect.</note>
There were, as we have already seen, instances in which
certain religious practices which were regarded as attestations
of loyalty, or as necessary to propitiate the gods in favour of
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
the State, were enforced by law; there were even a few
instances of philosophies, which were believed to lead directly
to immoral results or social convulsions, being suppressed;
but, as a general rule, speculation was untrammelled, the
notion of there being any necessary guilt in erroneous opinion
was unknown, and the boldest enquirers were regarded with
honour and admiration. The religious theory of Paganism
had in this respect some influence. Polytheism, with many
faults, had three great merits. It was eminently poetical,
eminently patriotic, and eminently tolerant. The conception
of a vast hierarchy of beings more glorious than, but not
wholly unlike, men, presiding over all the developments of
nature, and filling the universe with their deeds, supplied the
chief nutriment of the Greek imagination. The national
religions, interweaving religious ceremonies and associations
with all civic life, concentrated and intensified the
sentiment of patriotism, and the notion of many distinct
groups of gods led men to tolerate many forms of worship
and great variety of creeds. In that colossal amalgam of
nations of which Rome became the metropolis, intellectual
liberty still further advanced; the vast variety of philosophies
and beliefs expatiated unmolested; the search for truth was
regarded as an important element of virtue, and the relentless
and most sceptical criticism which Socrates had applied
in turn to all the fundamental propositions of popular belief
remained as an example to his successors.
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that one leading cause of the rapid
progress of the Church was that its teachers enforced their
distinctive tenets as absolutely essential to salvation, and thus
assailed at a great advantage the supporters of all other creeds
which did not claim this exclusive authority. We have seen,
too, that in an age of great and growing credulity they had
been conspicuous for their assertion of the duty of absolute,
unqualified, and unquestioning belief. The notion of the
guilt both of error and of doubt grew rapidly, and, being
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
soon regarded as a fundamental tenet, it determined the
whole course and policy of the Church.
</p>

<p>
And here, I think, it will not be unadvisable to pause for
a moment, and endeavour to ascertain what misconceived
truth lay at the root of this fatal tenet. Considered abstractedly
and by the light of nature, it is as unmeaning to
speak of the immorality of an intellectual mistake as it
would be to talk of the colour of a sound. If a man has
sincerely persuaded himself that it is possible for parallel
lines to meet, or for two straight lines to enclose a space, we
pronounce his judgment to be absurd; but it is free from all
tincture of immorality. And if, instead of failing to appreciate
a demonstrable truth, his error consisted in a false estimate
of the conflicting arguments of an historical problem,
this mistake&mdash;assuming always that the enquiry was an upright
one&mdash;is still simply external to the sphere of morals.
It is possible that his conclusion, by weakening some barrier
against vice, may produce vicious consequences, like those
which might ensue from some ill-advised modification of the
police force; but it in no degree follows from this that the
judgment is in itself criminal. If a student applies himself
with the same dispositions to Roman and Jewish histories,
the mistakes he may make in the latter are no more
immoral than those which he may make in the former.
</p>

<p>
There are, however, two cases in which an intellectual
error may be justly said to involve, or at least to represent,
guilt. In the first place, error very frequently springs from
the partial or complete absence of that mental disposition
which is implied in a real love of truth. Hypocrites, or men
who through interested motives profess opinions which they
do not really believe, are probably rarer than is usually supposed;
but it would be difficult to over-estimate the number
of those whose genuine convictions are due to the unresisted
bias of their interests. By the term interests, I mean not
only material well-being, but also all those mental luxuries,
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
all those grooves or channels for thought, which it is easy and
pleasing to follow, and painful and difficult to abandon.
Such are the love of ease, the love of certainty, the love of
system, the bias of the passions, the associations of the
imagination, as well as the coarser influences of social
position, domestic happiness, professional interest, party
feeling, or ambition. In most men, the love of truth is so
languid, and the reluctance to encounter mental suffering is
so great, that they yield their judgments without an effort to
the current, withdraw their minds from all opinions or
arguments opposed to their own, and thus speedily convince
themselves of the truth of what they wish to believe. He
who really loves truth is bound at least to endeavour to
resist these distorting influences, and in as far as his opinions
are the result of his not having done so, in so far they represent
a moral failing.
</p>

<p>
In the next place, it must be observed that every moral
disposition brings with it an intellectual bias which exercises
a great and often a controlling and decisive influence even
upon the most earnest enquirer. If we know the character
or disposition of a man, we can usually predict with
tolerable accuracy many of his opinions. We can tell to
what side of politics, to what canons of taste, to what theory
of morals he will naturally incline. Stern, heroic, and
haughty natures tend to systems in which these qualities
occupy the foremost position in the moral type, while gentle
natures will as naturally lean towards systems in which the
amiable virtues are supreme. Impelled by a species of moral
gravitation, the enquirer will glide insensibly to the system
which is congruous to his disposition, and intellectual difficulties
will seldom arrest him. He can have observed
human nature with but little fruit who has not remarked
how constant is this connection, and how very rarely men
change fundamentally the principles they had deliberately
adopted on religious, moral, or even political questions,
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
without the change being preceded, accompanied, or very
speedily followed, by a serious modification of character.
So, too, a vicious and depraved nature, or a nature which is
hard, narrow, and unsympathetic, will tend, much less by
calculation or indolence than by natural affinity, to low and
degrading views of human nature. Those who have never
felt the higher emotions will scarcely appreciate them. The
materials with which the intellect builds are often derived
from the heart, and a moral disease is therefore not unfrequently
at the root of an erroneous judgment.
</p>

<p>
Of these two truths the first cannot, I think, be said to
have had any influence in the formation of the theological
notion of the guilt of error. An elaborate process of mental
discipline, with a view to strengthening the critical powers
of the mind, is utterly remote from the spirit of theology;
and this is one of the great reasons why the growth of an
inductive and scientific spirit is invariably hostile to theological
interests. To raise the requisite standard of proof, to
inculcate hardness and slowness of belief, is the first task of
the inductive reasoner. He looks with great favour upon
the condition of a suspended judgment; he encourages men
rather to prolong than to abridge it; he regards the tendency
of the human mind to rapid and premature generalisations
as one of its most fatal vices; he desires especially that that
which is believed should not be so cherished that the mind
should be indisposed to admit doubt, or, on the appearance
of new arguments, to revise with impartiality its conclusions.
Nearly all the greatest intellectual achievements of the last
three centuries have been preceded and prepared by the
growth of scepticism. The historic scepticism which Vico,
Beaufort, Pouilly, and Voltaire in the last century, and
Niebuhr and Lewis in the present century, applied to ancient
history, lies at the root of all the great modern efforts to reconstruct
the history of mankind. The splendid discoveries
of physical science would have been impossible but for the
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
scientific scepticism of the school of Bacon, which dissipated
the old theories of the universe, and led men to demand a
severity of proof altogether unknown to the ancients. The
philosophic scepticism with which the system of Hume
ended and the system of Kant began, has given the greatest
modern impulse to metaphysics and ethics. Exactly in proportion,
therefore, as men are educated in the inductive
school, they are alienated from those theological systems
which represent a condition of doubt as sinful, seek to govern
the reason by the interests and the affections, and make it a
main object to destroy the impartiality of the judgment.
</p>

<p>
But although it is difficult to look upon Catholicism in
any other light than as the most deadly enemy of the
scientific spirit, it has always cordially recognised the most
important truth, that character in a very great measure
determines opinions. To cultivate the moral type that is
most congenial to the opinions it desires to recommend has
always been its effort, and the conviction that a deviation
from that type has often been the predisposing cause of intellectual
heresy, had doubtless a large share in the first persuasion
of the guilt of error. But priestly and other influences
soon conspired to enlarge this doctrine. A crowd of speculative,
historical, and administrative propositions were
asserted as essential to salvation, and all who rejected them
were wholly external to the bond of Christian sympathy.
</p>

<p>
If, indeed, we put aside the pure teaching of the Christian
founders, and consider the actual history of the Church since
Constantine, we shall find no justification for the popular
theory that beneath its influence the narrow spirit of patriotism
faded into a wide and cosmopolitan philanthropy. A
real though somewhat languid feeling of universal brotherhood
had already been created in the world by the universality
of the Roman Empire. In the new faith the range of
genuine sympathy was strictly limited by the creed. According
to the popular belief, all who differed from the
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
teaching of the orthodox lived under the hatred of the
Almighty, and were destined after death for an eternity of
anguish. Very naturally, therefore, they were wholly
alienated from the true believers, and no moral or intellectual
excellence could atone for their crime in propagating error.
The eighty or ninety sects,<note place='foot'>St. Augustine reckoned eighty-eight
sects as existing in his time.</note> into which Christianity speedily
divided, hated one another with an intensity that extorted
the wonder of Julian and the ridicule of the Pagans of
Alexandria, and the fierce riots and persecutions that hatred
produced appear in every page of ecclesiastical history.
There is, indeed, something at once grotesque and ghastly in
the spectacle. The Donatists, having separated from the
orthodox simply on the question of the validity of the consecration
of a certain bishop, declared that all who adopted
the orthodox view must be damned, refused to perform their
rites in the orthodox churches which they had seized, till they
had burnt the altar and scraped the wood, beat multitudes to
death with clubs, blinded others by anointing their eyes with
lime, filled Africa, during nearly two centuries, with war and
desolation, and contributed largely to its final ruin.<note place='foot'>See a full account of these
persecutions in Tillemont, <hi rend='italic'>Mém.
d'Histoire ecclés.</hi> tome vi.</note> The
childish and almost unintelligible quarrels between the
Homoiousians and the Homoousians, between those who
maintained that the nature of Christ was like that of the
Father and those who maintained that it was the same,
filled the world with riot and hatred. The Catholics tell
how an Arian Emperor caused eighty orthodox priests to be
drowned on a single occasion;<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>, iv. 16. This
anecdote is much doubted by
modern historians.</note> how three thousand persons
perished in the riots that convulsed Constantinople when the
Arian Bishop Macedonius superseded the Athanasian Paul;<note place='foot'>Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Christianity</hi>
(ed. 1867), vol. ii. p. 422.</note>
how George of Cappadocia, the Arian Bishop of Alexandria,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
caused the widows of the Athanasian party to be scourged
on the soles of their feet, the holy virgins to be stripped
naked, to be flogged with the prickly branches of palm-trees,
or to be slowly scorched over fires till they abjured their
creed.<note place='foot'>St. Athanasius, <hi rend='italic'>Historical
Treatises</hi> (Library of the Fathers),
pp. 192, 284.</note> The triumph of the Catholics in Egypt was accompanied
(if we may believe the solemn assertions of eighty
Arian Bishops) by every variety of plunder, murder, sacrilege,
and outrage,<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Christianity</hi>,
ii. pp. 436-437.</note> and Arius himself was probably poisoned
by Catholic hands.<note place='foot'>The death of Arius, as is well
known, took place suddenly (his
bowels, it is said, coming out) when
he was just about to make his
triumphal entry into the Cathedral
of Constantinople. The death
(though possibly natural) never
seems to have been regarded as
such, but it was a matter of controversy
whether it was a miracle
or a murder.</note> The followers of St. Cyril of
Alexandria, who were chiefly monks, filled their city with
riot and bloodshed, wounded the prefect Orestes, dragged the
pure and gifted Hypatia into one of their churches, murdered
her, tore the flesh from her bones with sharp shells, and,
having stripped her body naked, flung her mangled remains
into the flames.<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi>, vii. 13-15.</note> In Ephesus, during the contest between
St. Cyril and the Nestorians, the cathedral itself was the
theatre of a fierce and bloody conflict.<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. pp. 214-215.</note> Constantinople, on
the occasion of the deposition of St. Chrysostom, was for
several days in a condition of absolute anarchy.<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Christianity</hi>,
vol. iii. p. 145.</note> After the
Council of Chalcedon, Jerusalem and Alexandria were again
convulsed, and the bishop of the latter city was murdered
in his baptistery.<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. pp. 290-291.</note> About fifty years later, when the Monophysite
controversy was at its height, the palace of the
emperor at Constantinople was blockaded, the churches were
besieged, and the streets commanded by furious bands of
contending monks.<note place='foot'>Ibid. vol. i. pp. 310-311.</note> Repressed for a time, the riots broke
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
out two years after with an increased ferocity, and almost
every leading city of the East was filled by the monks with
bloodshed and with outrage.<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. pp. 314-318.
Dean Milman thus sums up the
history: <q>Monks in Alexandria,
monks in Antioch, monks in Jerusalem,
monks in Constantinople,
decide peremptorily on orthodoxy
and heterodoxy. The bishops
themselves cower before them.
Macedonius in Constantinople, Flavianus
in Antioch, Elias in Jerusalem,
condemn themselves and
abdicate, or are driven from their
sees. Persecution is universal&mdash;persecution
by every means of violence
and cruelty; the only question
is, in whose hands is the power to
persecute.... Bloodshed, murder,
treachery, assassination, even during
the public worship of God&mdash;these
are the frightful means by
which each party strives to maintain
its opinions and to defeat its
adversary.</q></note> St. Augustine himself is accused
of having excited every kind of popular persecution against
the Semi-Pelagians.<note place='foot'>See a striking passage from
Julianus of Eclana, cited by Milman,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. p. 164.</note> The Councils, animated by an almost
frantic hatred, urged on by their anathemas the rival sects.<note place='foot'><q>Nowhere is Christianity less
attractive than in the Councils of
the Church.... Intrigue, injustice,
violence, decisions on authority
alone, and that the authority of a
turbulent majority, ... detract
from the reverence and impugn the
judgments of at least the later
Councils. The close is almost invariably
a terrible anathema, in
which it is impossible not to discern
the tones of human hatred, of
arrogant triumph, of rejoicing at
the damnation imprecated against
the humiliated adversary.</q>&mdash;Ibid.
vol. i. p. 202.</note>
In the <q>Robber Council</q> of Ephesus, Flavianus, the Bishop
of Constantinople, was kicked and beaten by the Bishop of
Alexandria, or at least by his followers, and a few days later
died from the effect of the blows.<note place='foot'>See the account of this scene in
Gibbon, <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>, ch. xlvii.;
Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. p. 263. There is a conflict
of authorities as to whether
the Bishop of Alexandria himself
kicked his adversary, or, to speak
more correctly, the act which is
charged against him by some contemporary
writers is not charged
against him by others. The violence
was certainly done by his
followers and in his presence.</note> In the contested election
that resulted in the election of St. Damasus as Pope of Rome,
though no theological question appears to have been at issue,
the riots were so fierce that one hundred and thirty-seven
corpses were found in one of the churches.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxvii. 3.</note> The precedent
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
of the Jewish persecutions of idolatry having been adduced
by St. Cyprian, in the third century, in favour of excommunication,<note place='foot'>Cyprian, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> lxi.</note>
was urged by Optatus, in the reign of Constantine,
in favour of persecuting the Donatists;<note place='foot'>Milman, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Christianity</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 306.</note> in the next
reign we find a large body of Christians presenting to the
emperor a petition, based upon this precedent, imploring
him to destroy by force the Pagan worship.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iii. 10.</note> About fifteen
years later, the whole Christian Church was prepared, on the
same grounds, to support the persecuting policy of St.
Ambrose,<note place='foot'><q>By this time the Old Testament
language and sentiment with
regard to idolatry were completely
incorporated with the Christian
feeling; and when Ambrose enforced
on a Christian Emperor the
sacred duty of intolerance against
opinions and practices which
scarcely a century before had been
the established religion of the
Empire, his zeal was supported by
almost the unanimous applause of
the Christian world.</q>&mdash;Milman's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Christianity</hi>, vol. iii. p. 159.</note> the contending sects having found, in the duty of
crushing religious liberty, the solitary tenet on which they
were agreed. The most unaggressive and unobtrusive forms
of Paganism were persecuted with the same ferocity.<note place='foot'>See the Theodosian laws of
Paganism.</note> To
offer a sacrifice was to commit a capital offence; to hang up
a simple chaplet was to incur the forfeiture of an estate.
The noblest works of Asiatic architecture and of Greek
sculpture perished by the same iconoclasm that shattered the
humble temple at which the peasant loved to pray, or the
household gods which consecrated his home. There were no
varieties of belief too minute for the new intolerance to
embitter. The question of the proper time of celebrating
Easter was believed to involve the issue of salvation or
damnation;<note place='foot'>This appears from the whole
history of the controversy; but the
prevailing feeling is, I think, expressed
with peculiar vividness in
the following passage:&mdash;<q>Eadmer
says (following the words of Bede)
in Colman's times there was a sharp
controversy about the observing of
Easter, and other rules of life for
churchmen; therefore, this question deservedly excited the minds
and feeling of many people, fearing
lest, perhaps, after having received
the name of Christians, they should
run, or had run in vain.</q>&mdash;King's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Church of Ireland</hi>, book
ii. ch. vi.</note> and when, long after, in the fourteenth century,
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
the question of the nature of the light at the transfiguration
was discussed at Constantinople, those who refused to
admit that that light was uncreated, were deprived of the
honours of Christian burial.<note place='foot'>Gibbon, chap. lxiii.</note>
</p>

<p>
Together with these legislative and ecclesiastical measures,
a literature arose surpassing in its mendacious ferocity any
other the world had known. The polemical writers habitually
painted as dæmons those who diverged from the orthodox
belief, gloated with a vindictive piety over the sufferings of
the heretic upon earth, as upon a Divine punishment, and
sometimes, with an almost superhuman malice, passing in
imagination beyond the threshold of the grave, exulted in
no ambiguous terms on the tortures which they believed to
be reserved for him for ever. A few men, such as Synesius,
Basil, or Salvian, might still find some excellence in Pagans
or heretics, but their candour was altogether exceptional;
and he who will compare the beautiful pictures the Greek
poets gave of their Trojan adversaries, or the Roman historians
of the enemies of their country, with those which ecclesiastical
writers, for many centuries, almost invariably gave of all
who were opposed to their Church, may easily estimate the
extent to which cosmopolitan sympathy had retrograded.
</p>

<p>
At the period, however, when the Western monasteries
began to discharge their intellectual functions, the supremacy
of Catholicism was nearly established, and polemical ardour
had begun to wane. The literary zeal of the Church took
other forms, but all were deeply tinged by the monastic
spirit. It is difficult or impossible to conceive what would
have been the intellectual future of the world had Catholicism
never arisen&mdash;what principles or impulses would have guided
the course of the human mind, or what new institutions
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
would have been created for its culture. Under the influence
of Catholicism, the monastery became the one sphere of
intellectual labour, and it continued during many centuries
to occupy that position. Without entering into anything
resembling a literary history, which would be foreign to the
objects of the present work, I shall endeavour briefly to
estimate the manner in which it discharged its functions.
</p>

<p>
The first idea that is naturally suggested by the mention
of the intellectual services of monasteries is the preservation
of the writings of the Pagans. I have already observed
that among the early Christians there was a marked difference
on the subject of their writings. The school which was
represented by Tertullian regarded them with abhorrence;
while the Platonists, who were represented by Justin Martyr,
Clement of Alexandria, and Origen, not merely recognised
with great cordiality their beauties, but even imagined that
they could detect in them both the traces of an original
Divine inspiration, and plagiarisms from the Jewish writings.
While avoiding, for the most part, these extremes, St. Augustine,
the great organiser of Western Christianity, treats the
Pagan writings with appreciative respect. He had himself
ascribed his first conversion from a course of vice to the
'Hortensius' of Cicero, and his works are full of discriminating,
and often very beautiful, applications of the old
Roman literature. The attempt of Julian to prevent the
Christians from teaching the classics, and the extreme resentment
which that attempt elicited, show how highly the
Christian leaders of that period valued this form of education;
and it was naturally the more cherished on account of the
contest. The influence of Neoplatonism, the baptism of
multitudes of nominal Christians after Constantine, and the
decline of zeal which necessarily accompanied prosperity,
had all in different ways the same tendency. In Synesius
we have the curious phenomenon of a bishop who, not content
with proclaiming himself the admiring friend of the
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
Pagan Hypatia, openly declared his complete disbelief in the
resurrection of the body, and his firm adhesion to the Platonic
doctrine of the pre-existence of souls.<note place='foot'>An interesting sketch of this
very interesting prelate has lately
been written by M. Druon, <hi rend='italic'>Étude
sur la Vie et les Œuvres de Synésius</hi>
(Paris, 1859).</note> Had the
ecclesiastical theory prevailed which gave such latitude even
to the leaders of the Church, the course of Christianity would
have been very different. A reactionary spirit, however,
arose at Rome. The doctrine of exclusive salvation supplied
its intellectual basis; the political and organising genius of
the Roman ecclesiastics impelled them to reduce belief into
a rigid form; the genius of St. Gregory guided the movement,<note place='foot'>Tradition has pronounced Gregory
the Great to have been the
destroyer of the Palatine library,
and to have been especially zealous
in burning the writings of Livy,
because they described the achievements
of the Pagan gods. For
these charges, however (which I
am sorry to find repeated by so
eminent a writer as Dr. Draper),
there is no real evidence, for they
are not found in any writer earlier
than the twelfth century. (See
Bayle, <hi rend='italic'>Dict.</hi> art. <q>Greg.</q>) The extreme
contempt of Gregory for
Pagan literature is, however, sufficiently
manifested in his famous
and very curious letter to Desiderius,
Bishop of Vienne, rebuking
him for having taught certain persons
Pagan literature, and thus
mingled <q>the praises of Jupiter
with the praises of Christ;</q> doing
what would be impious even for a
religious layman, <q>polluting the
mind with the blasphemous praises
of the wicked.</q> Some curious evidence
of the feelings of the Christians
of the fourth, fifth, and sixth
centuries, about Pagan literature,
is given in Guinguené, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. littéraire
de l'Italie</hi>, tome i. p. 29-31,
and some legends of a later period
are candidly related by one of the
most enthusiastic English advocates
of the Middle Ages. (Maitland,
<hi rend='italic'>Dark Ages</hi>.)</note>
and a series of historical events, of which the ecclesiastical
and political separation of the Western empire from the
speculative Greeks, and the invasion and conversion of the
barbarians, were the most important, definitely established
the ascendancy of the Catholic type. In the convulsions
that followed the barbarian invasions, intellectual energy of
a secular kind almost absolutely ceased. A parting gleam
issued, indeed, in the sixth century, from the Court of Theodoric,
at Ravenna, which was adorned by the genius of
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
Boëthius, and the talent of Cassiodorus and Symmachus,
but after this time, for a long period, literature consisted
almost exclusively of sermons and lives of saints, which
were composed in the monasteries.<note place='foot'>Probably the best account of
the intellectual history of these
times is still to be found in the admirable
introductory chapters with
which the Benedictines prefaced
each century of their <hi rend='italic'>Hist. littéraire
de la France</hi>. The Benedictines
think (with Hallam) that the
eighth century was, on the whole,
the darkest on the continent, though
England attained its lowest point
somewhat later. Of the great protectors
of learning Theodoric was
unable to write (see Guinguené,
tome i. p. 31), and Charlemagne
(Eginhard) only began to learn
when advanced in life, and was
never quite able to master the accomplishment.
Alfred, however,
was distinguished in literature.</note> Gregory of Tours
was succeeded as an annalist by the still feebler Fredegarius,
and there was then a long and absolute blank. A
few outlying countries showed some faint animation. St.
Leander and St. Isidore planted at Seville a school, which
flourished in the seventh century, and the distant monasteries
of Ireland continued somewhat later to be the
receptacles of learning; but the rest of Europe sank into an
almost absolute torpor, till the rationalism of Abelard, and
the events that followed the crusades, began the revival of
learning. The principal service which Catholicism rendered
during this period to Pagan literature was probably the perpetuation
of Latin as a sacred language. The complete
absence of all curiosity about that literature is shown by the
fact that Greek was suffered to become almost absolutely
extinct, though there was no time when the Western nations
had not some relations with the Greek empire, or when
pilgrimages to the Holy Land altogether ceased. The study
of the Latin classics was for the most part positively discouraged.
The writers, it was believed, were burning in
hell; the monks were too inflated with their imaginary
knowledge to regard with any respect a Pagan writer, and
periodical panics about the approaching termination of the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
world continually checked any desire for secular learning.<note place='foot'>The belief that the world was
just about to end was, as is well
known, very general among the
early Christians, and greatly
affected their lives. It appears in
the New Testament, and very
clearly in the epistle ascribed to
Barnabas in the first century. The
persecutions of the second and
third centuries revived it, and both
Tertullian and Cyprian (<hi rend='italic'>in Demetrianum</hi>)
strongly assert it. With
the triumph of Christianity the
apprehension for a time subsided;
but it reappeared with great force
when the dissolution of the Empire
was manifestly impending, when it
was accomplished, and in the prolonged
anarchy and suffering that
ensued. Gregory of Tours, writing
in the latter part of the sixth century,
speaks of it as very prevalent
(<hi rend='italic'>Prologue to the First Book</hi>); and
St. Gregory the Great, about the
same time, constantly expresses it.
The panic that filled Europe at the
end of the tenth century has been
often described.</note>
It was the custom among some monks, when they were under
the discipline of silence, and desired to ask for Virgil, Horace,
or any other Gentile work, to indicate their wish by scratching
their ears like a dog, to which animal it was thought the
Pagans might be reasonably compared.<note place='foot'>Maitland's <hi rend='italic'>Dark Ages</hi>, p. 403.</note> The monasteries
contained, it is said, during some time, the only libraries in
Europe, and were therefore the sole receptacles of the Pagan
manuscripts; but we cannot infer from this that, if the
monasteries had not existed, similar libraries would not have
been called into being in their place. To the occasional
industry of the monks, in copying the works of antiquity,
we must oppose the industry they displayed, though chiefly
at a somewhat later period, in scraping the ancient parchments,
in order that, having obliterated the writing of the
Pagans, they might cover them with their own legends.<note place='foot'>This passion for scraping
MSS. became common, according to
Montfaucon, after the twelfth century.
(Maitland, p. 40.) According
to Hallam, however (<hi rend='italic'>Middle Ages</hi>,
ch. ix. part i.), it must have begun
earlier, being chiefly caused by the
cessation or great diminution of
the supply of Egyptian papyrus,
in consequence of the capture of
Alexandria by the Saracens, early
in the seventh century.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are some aspects, however, in which the monastic
period of literature appears eminently beautiful. The fretfulness
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
and impatience and extreme tension of modern literary
life, the many anxieties that paralyse, and the feverish craving
for applause that perverts, so many noble intellects, were
then unknown. Severed from all the cares of active life, in
the deep calm of the monastery, where the turmoil of the
outer world could never come, the monkish scholar pursued
his studies in a spirit which has now almost faded from the
world. No doubt had ever disturbed his mind. To him the
problem of the universe seemed solved. Expatiating for ever
with unfaltering faith upon the unseen world, he had learnt
to live for it alone. His hopes were not fixed upon human
greatness or fame, but upon the pardon of his sins, and the
rewards of a happier world. A crowd of quaint and often
beautiful legends illustrate the deep union that subsisted
between literature and religion. It is related of Cædmon,
the first great poet of the Anglo-Saxons, that he found in the
secular life no vent for his hidden genius. When the warriors
assembled at their banquets, sang in turn the praises of
war or beauty, as the instrument passed to him, he rose and
went out with a sad heart, for he alone was unable to weave
his thoughts in verse. Wearied and desponding he lay down
to rest, when a figure appeared to him in his dream and commanded
him to sing the Creation of the World. A transport
of religious fervour thrilled his brain, his imprisoned
intellect was unlocked, and he soon became the foremost
poet of his land.<note place='foot'>Bede, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> iv. 24.</note> A Spanish boy, having long tried in vain
to master his task, and driven to despair by the severity of
his teacher, ran away from his father's home. Tired with
wandering, and full of anxious thoughts, he sat down to rest
by the margin of a well, when his eye was caught by the
deep furrow in the stone. He asked a girl who was drawing
water to explain it, and she told him that it had been worn
by the constant attrition of the rope. The poor boy, who
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
was already full of remorse for what he had done, recognised
in the reply a Divine intimation. <q>If,</q> he thought, <q>by daily
use the soft rope could thus penetrate the hard stone, surely
a long perseverance could overcome the dulness of my
brain.</q> He returned to his father's house; he laboured with
redoubled earnestness, and he lived to be the great St. Isidore
of Spain.<note place='foot'>Mariana, <hi rend='italic'>De Rebus Hispaniæ</hi>,
vi. 7. Mariana says the stone was
in his time preserved as a relic.</note> A monk who had led a vicious life was saved, it
is said, from hell, because it was found that his sins, though
very numerous, were just outnumbered by the letters of a
ponderous and devout book he had written.<note place='foot'>Odericus Vitalis, quoted by
Maitland (<hi rend='italic'>Dark Ages</hi>, pp. 268-269).
The monk was restored to life that
he might have an opportunity of
reformation. The escape was a
narrow one, for there was only one
letter against which no sin could
be adduced&mdash;a remarkable instance
of the advantages of a diffuse style.</note> The Holy
Spirit, in the shape of a dove, had been seen to inspire St.
Gregory; and the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas, and of
several other theologians, had been expressly applauded by
Christ or by his saints. When, twenty years after death, the
tomb of a certain monkish writer was opened, it was found
that, although the remainder of the body had crumbled into
dust, the hand that had held the pen remained flexible and
undecayed.<note place='foot'>Digby, <hi rend='italic'>Mores Catholici</hi>, book
x. p. 246. Matthew of Westminster
tells of a certain king who was
very charitable, and whose right
hand (which had assuaged many
sorrows) remained undecayed after
death (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 644).</note> A young and nameless scholar was once buried
near a convent at Bonn. The night after his funeral, a nun
whose cell overlooked the cemetery was awakened by a brilliant
light that filled the room. She started up, imagining
that the day had dawned, but on looking out she found that
it was still night, though a dazzling splendour was around.
A female form of matchless loveliness was bending over the
scholar's grave. The effluence of her beauty filled the air
with light, and she clasped to her heart a snow-white dove
that rose to meet her from the tomb. It was the Mother of
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
God come to receive the soul of the martyred scholar; <q>for
scholars too,</q> adds the old chronicler, <q>are martyrs if they
live in purity and labour with courage.</q><note place='foot'>See Hauréau, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Philosophie scolastique</hi>, tome i. pp. 24-25.</note>
</p>

<p>
But legends of this kind, though not without a very
real beauty, must not blind us to the fact that the period of
Catholic ascendancy was on the whole one of the most
deplorable in the history of the human mind. The energies
of Christendom were diverted from all useful and progressive
studies, and were wholly expended on theological disquisitions.
A crowd of superstitions, attributed to infallible wisdom,
barred the path of knowledge, and the charge of magic,
or the charge of heresy, crushed every bold enquiry in the
sphere of physical nature or of opinions. Above all, the
conditions of true enquiry had been cursed by the Church.
A blind unquestioning credulity was inculcated as the first
of duties, and the habit of doubt, the impartiality of a suspended
judgment, the desire to hear both sides of a disputed
question, and to emancipate the judgment from unreasoning
prejudice, were all in consequence condemned. The belief
in the guilt of error and doubt became universal, and that
belief may be confidently pronounced to be the most pernicious
superstition that has ever been accredited among mankind.
Mistaken facts are rectified by enquiry. Mistaken
methods of research, though far more inveterate, are gradually
altered; but the spirit that shrinks from enquiry as
sinful, and deems a state of doubt a state of guilt, is the most
enduring disease that can afflict the mind of man. Not till
the education of Europe passed from the monasteries to the
universities, not till Mohammedan science, and classical free-thought,
and industrial independence broke the sceptre of
the Church, did the intellectual revival of Europe begin.
</p>

<p>
I am aware that so strong a statement of the intellectual
darkness of the middle ages is likely to encounter opposition
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
from many quarters. The blindness which the philosophers
of the eighteenth century manifested to their better side has
produced a reaction which has led many to an opposite, and,
I believe, far more erroneous extreme. Some have become
eulogists of the period, through love of its distinctive theological
doctrines, and others through archæological enthusiasm,
while a very pretentious and dogmatic, but, I think, sometimes
superficial, school of writers, who loudly boast themselves the
regenerators of history, and treat with supreme contempt
all the varieties of theological opinion, are accustomed, partly
through a very shallow historical optimism which scarcely
admits the possibility of retrogression, and partly through
sympathy with the despotic character of Catholicism, to
extol the mediæval society in the most extravagant terms.
Without entering into a lengthy examination of this subject,
I may be permitted to indicate shortly two or three
fallacies which are continually displayed in their appreciations.
</p>

<p>
It is an undoubted truth that, for a considerable period,
almost all the knowledge of Europe was included in the
monasteries, and from this it is continually inferred that,
had these institutions not existed, knowledge would have
been absolutely extinguished. But such a conclusion I conceive
to be altogether untrue. During the period of the
Pagan empire, intellectual life had been diffused over a vast
portion of the globe. Egypt and Asia Minor had become
great centres of civilisation. Greece was still a land of
learning. Spain, Gaul, and even Britain,<note place='foot'>On the progress of Roman civilisation in Britain, see Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Agricola</hi>, xxi.</note> were full of
libraries and teachers. The schools of Narbonne, Arles,
Bordeaux, Toulouse, Lyons, Marseilles, Poitiers, and Trèves
were already famous. The Christian emperor Gratian, in
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 376, carried out in Gaul a system similar to that which
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
had already, under the Antonines, been pursued in Italy,
ordaining that teachers should be supported by the State in
every leading city.<note place='foot'>See the Benedictine <hi rend='italic'>Hist. littér. de la France</hi>, tome i. part ii. p. 9.</note> To suppose that Latin literature,
having been so widely diffused, could have totally perished,
or that all interest in it could have permanently ceased, even
under the extremely unfavourable circumstances that followed
the downfall of the Roman Empire and the Mohammedan
invasions, is, I conceive, absurd. If Catholicism had never
existed, the human mind would have sought other spheres
for its development, and at least a part of the treasures of
antiquity would have been preserved in other ways. The
monasteries, as corporations of peaceful men protected from
the incursions of the barbarians, became very naturally the
reservoirs to which the streams of literature flowed; but
much of what they are represented as creating, they had in
reality only attracted. The inviolable sanctity which they
secured rendered them invaluable receptacles of ancient
learning in a period of anarchy and perpetual war, and the
industry of the monks in transcribing, probably more than
counterbalanced their industry in effacing, the classical
writings. The ecclesiastical unity of Christendom was also
of extreme importance in rendering possible a general interchange
of ideas. Whether these services outweighed the
intellectual evils resulting from the complete diversion of the
human mind from all secular learning, and from the persistent
inculcation, as a matter of duty, of that habit of
abject credulity which it is the first task of the intellectual
reformer to eradicate, may be reasonably doubted.
</p>

<p>
It is not unfrequent, again, to hear the preceding fallacy
stated in a somewhat different form. We are reminded that
almost all the men of genius during several centuries were
great theologians, and we are asked to conceive the more
than Egyptian darkness that would have prevailed had the
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
Catholic theology which produced them not existed. This
judgment resembles that of the prisoner in a famous passage
of Cicero, who, having spent his entire life in a dark dungeon,
and knowing the light of day only from a single ray which
passed through a fissure in the wall, inferred that if the
wall were removed, as the fissure would no longer exist, all
light would be excluded. Mediæval Catholicism discouraged
and suppressed in every way secular studies, while it conferred
a monopoly of wealth and honour and power upon
the distinguished theologian. Very naturally, therefore, it
attracted into the path of theology the genius that would
have existed without it, but would under other circumstances
have been displayed in other forms.
</p>

<p>
It is not to be inferred, however, from this, that mediæval
Catholicism had not, in the sphere of intellect, any real
creative power. A great moral or religious enthusiasm
always evokes a certain amount of genius that would not
otherwise have existed, or at least been displayed, and the
monasteries were peculiarly fitted to develop certain casts
of mind, which in no other sphere could have so perfectly
expanded. The great writings of St. Thomas Aquinas<note place='foot'>A biographer of St. Thomas
Aquinas modestly observes:&mdash;<q>L'opinion
généralement répandue
parmi les théologiens c'est que la
<hi rend='italic'>Somme de Théologie</hi> de St. Thomas
est non-seulement son chef-d'œuvre
mais aussi celui de l'esprit humain.</q>
(!!)&mdash;Carle, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de St.-Thomas
d'Aquin</hi>, p. 140.</note> and
his followers, and, in more modern times, the massive and
conscientious erudition of the Benedictines, will always make
certain periods of the monastic history venerable to the
scholar. But, when we remember that during many
centuries nearly every one possessing any literary taste or
talents became a monk, when we recollect that these monks
were familiar with the language, and might easily have been
familiar with the noble literature, of ancient Rome, and when
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
we also consider the mode of their life, which would seem,
from its freedom from care, and from the very monotony of its
routine, peculiarly calculated to impel them to study, we
can hardly fail to wonder how very little of any real value
they added, for so long a period, to the knowledge of mankind.
It is indeed a remarkable fact that, even in the ages
when the Catholic ascendancy was most perfect, some of the
greatest achievements were either opposed or simply external
to ecclesiastical influence. Roger Bacon, having been a monk,
is frequently spoken of as a creature of Catholic teaching.
But there never was a more striking instance of the force of
a great genius in resisting the tendencies of his age. At a
time when physical science was continually neglected, discouraged,
or condemned, at a time when all the great prizes
of the world were open to men who pursued a very different
course, Bacon applied himself with transcendent genius to
the study of nature. Fourteen years of his life were spent
in prison, and when he died his name was blasted as a
magician. The mediæval laboratories were chiefly due to
the pursuit of alchemy, or to Mohammedan encouragement.
The inventions of the mariner's compass, of gunpowder, and
of rag paper were all, indeed, of extreme importance; but no
part of the credit of them belongs to the monks. Their
origin is involved in much obscurity, but it is almost certain
that the last two, at all events, were first employed in Europe
by the Mohammedans of Spain. Cotton paper was in use
among these as early as 1009. Among the Christian nations
it appears to have been unknown till late in the thirteenth
century. The first instance of the employment of artillery
among Christian nations was at the battle of Crecy, but the
knowledge of gunpowder among them has been traced back
as far as 1338. There is abundant evidence, however, of its
employment in Spain by Mohammedans in several sieges in
the thirteenth century, and even in a battle between the
Moors of Seville and those of Tunis at the end of the eleventh
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
century.<note place='foot'>See Viardot, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Arabes
en Espagne</hi>, ii. 142-166. Prescott's
<hi rend='italic'>Ferdinand and Isabella</hi>, ch. viii.
Viardot contends that the compass&mdash;which
appears to have been long
known in China&mdash;was first introduced
into Europe by the Mohammedans;
but the evidence of this
appears inconclusive.</note> In invention, indeed, as well as in original research,
the mediæval monasteries were singularly barren. They
cultivated formal logic to great perfection. They produced
many patient and laborious, though, for the most part,
wholly uncritical scholars, and many philosophers who,
having assumed their premises with unfaltering faith, reasoned
from them with admirable subtlety; but they taught men to
regard the sacrifice of secular learning as a noble thing; they
impressed upon them a theory of the habitual government
of the universe, which is absolutely untrue; and they diffused,
wherever their influence extended, habits of credulity and
intolerance that are the most deadly poisons to the human
mind.
</p>

<p>
It is, again, very frequently observed among the more
philosophic eulogists of the mediæval period, that although
the Catholic Church is a trammel and an obstacle to the
progress of civilised nations, although it would be scarcely
possible to exaggerate the misery her persecuting spirit caused,
when the human mind had outstripped her teaching; yet
there was a time when she was greatly in advance of the
age, and the complete and absolute ascendancy she then
exercised was intellectually eminently beneficial. That there
is much truth in this view, I have myself repeatedly maintained.
But when men proceed to isolate the former period,
and to make it the theme of unqualified eulogy, they fall, I
think, into a grave error. The evils that sprang from the
later period of Catholic ascendancy were not an accident or
a perversion, but a normal and necessary consequence of the
previous despotism. The principles which were imposed
on the mediæval world, and which were the conditions of so
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
much of its distinctive excellence, were of such a nature that
they claimed to be final, and could not possibly be discarded
without a struggle and a convulsion. We must estimate
the influence of these principles considered as a whole, and
during the entire period of their operation. There are some
poisons which, before they kill men, allay pain and diffuse
a soothing sensation through the frame. We may recognise
the hour of enjoyment they procure, but we must not separate
it from the price at which it is purchased.
</p>

<p>
The extremely unfavourable influence the Catholic
Church long exercised upon intellectual development had
important moral consequences. Although moral progress
does not necessarily depend upon intellectual progress it is
materially affected by it, intellectual activity being the most
important element in the growth of that great and complex
organism which we call civilisation. The mediæval
credulity had also a more direct moral influence in producing
that indifference to truth, which is the most repulsive
feature of so many Catholic writings. The very large
part that must be assigned to deliberate forgeries in the early
apologetic literature of the Church we have already seen; and
no impartial reader can, I think, investigate the innumerable
grotesque and lying legends that, during the whole course of
the Middle Ages, were deliberately palmed upon mankind as
undoubted facts, can follow the histories of the false decretals,
and the discussions that were connected with them, or can
observe the complete and absolute incapacity most Catholic
historians have displayed, of conceiving any good thing in the
ranks of their opponents, or of stating with common fairness
any consideration that can tell against their cause, without
acknowledging how serious and how inveterate has been the
evil. There have, no doubt, been many noble individual exceptions.
Yet it is, I believe, difficult to exaggerate the
extent to which this moral defect exists in most of the ancient
and very much of the modern literature of Catholicism. It
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
is this which makes it so unspeakably repulsive to all independent
and impartial thinkers, and has led a great German
historian<note place='foot'>Herder.</note> to declare, with much bitterness, that the phrase
Christian veracity deserves to rank with the phrase Punic
faith. But this absolute indifference to truth whenever
falsehood could subserve the interests of the Church is perfectly
explicable, and was found in multitudes who, in other
respects, exhibited the noblest virtue. An age which has
ceased to value impartiality of judgment will soon cease to
value accuracy of statement; and when credulity is inculcated
as a virtue, falsehood will not long be stigmatised as a vice.
When, too, men are firmly convinced that salvation can only
be found within their Church, and that their Church can absolve
from all guilt, they will speedily conclude that nothing
can possibly be wrong which is beneficial to it. They exchange
the love of truth for what they call the love of <emph>the</emph>
truth. They regard morals as derived from and subordinate
to theology, and they regulate all their statements, not by the
standard of veracity, but by the interests of their creed.
</p>

<p>
Another important moral consequence of the monastic
system was the great prominence given to pecuniary compensations
for crime. It had been at first one of the broad
distinctions between Paganism and Christianity, that, while
the rites of the former were for the most part unconnected
with moral dispositions, Christianity made purity of heart an
essential element of all its worship. Among the Pagans a
few faint efforts had, it is true, been made in this direction.
An old precept or law, which is referred to by Cicero, and
which was strongly reiterated by Apollonius of Tyana, and
the Pythagoreans, declared that <q>no impious man should
dare to appease the anger of the divinities by gifts;</q><note place='foot'><q>Impius ne audeto placare
donis iram Deorum.</q>&mdash;Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De
Leg.</hi> ii. 9. See, too, Philost.
<hi rend='italic'>Apoll. Tyan.</hi> i. 11.</note> and
oracles are said to have more than once proclaimed that the
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
hecatombs of noble oxen with gilded horns that were offered
up ostentatiously by the rich, were less pleasing to the gods
than the wreaths of flowers and the modest and reverential
worship of the poor.<note place='foot'>There are three or four instances of this related by Porphyry,
<hi rend='italic'>De Abstin. Carnis</hi>, lib. ii.</note> In general, however, in the Pagan
world, the service of the temple had little or no connection
with morals, and the change which Christianity effected in
this respect was one of its most important benefits to mankind.
It was natural, however, and perhaps inevitable, that
in the course of time, and under the action of very various
causes, the old Pagan sentiment should revive, and even with
an increased intensity. In no respect had the Christians
been more nobly distinguished than by their charity. It was
not surprising that the Fathers, while exerting all their eloquence
to stimulate this virtue&mdash;especially during the calamities
that accompanied the dissolution of the Empire&mdash;should
have dilated in extremely strong terms upon the spiritual
benefits the donor would receive for his gift. It is also not
surprising that this selfish calculation should gradually, and
among hard and ignorant men, have absorbed all other motives.
A curious legend, which is related by a writer of the
seventh century, illustrates the kind of feeling that had arisen.
The Christian bishop Synesius succeeded in converting a
Pagan named Evagrius, who for a long time, however, felt
doubts about the passage, <q>He who giveth to the poor
lendeth to the Lord.</q> On his conversion, and in obedience
to this verse, he gave Synesius three hundred pieces of gold
to be distributed among the poor; but he exacted from the
bishop, as the representative of Christ, a promissory note,
engaging that he should be repaid in the future world.
Many years later, Evagrius, being on his death-bed, commanded
his sons, when they buried him, to place the note in
his hand, and to do so without informing Synesius. His
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
dying injunction was observed, and three days afterwards he
appeared to Synesius in a dream, told him that the debt had
been paid, and ordered him to go to the tomb, where he would
find a written receipt. Synesius did as he was commanded,
and, the grave being opened, the promissory note was found
in the hand of the dead man, with an endorsement declaring
that the debt had been paid by Christ. The note, it was said,
was long after preserved as a relic in the church of Cyrene.
</p>

<p>
The kind of feeling which this legend displays was soon
turned with tenfold force into the channel of monastic life.
A law of Constantine accorded, and several later laws enlarged,
the power of bequests to ecclesiastics. Ecclesiastical
property was at the same time exonerated from the public
burdens, and this measure not only directly assisted its increase,
but had also an important indirect influence; for, when
taxation was heavy, many laymen ceded the ownership of
their estates to the monasteries, with a secret condition that
they should, as vassals, receive the revenues unburdened by
taxation, and subject only to a slight payment to the monks
as to their feudal lords.<note place='foot'>Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antich. Italiane</hi>,
diss. lxvii.</note> The monks were regarded as the
trustees of the poor, and also as themselves typical poor, and
all the promises that applied to those who gave to the poor
applied, it was said, to the benefactors of the monasteries.
The monastic chapel also contained the relics of saints or
sacred images of miraculous power, and throngs of worshippers
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
were attracted by the miracles, and desired to place themselves
under the protection, of the saint. It is no exaggeration
to say that to give money to the priests was for several
centuries the first article of the moral code. Political minds
may have felt the importance of aggrandising a pacific and
industrious class in the centre of a disorganised society, and
family affection may have predisposed many in favour of institutions
which contained at least one member of most
families; but in the overwhelming majority of cases the motive
was simple superstition. In seasons of sickness, of
danger, of sorrow, or of remorse, whenever the fear or the
conscience of the worshipper was awakened, he hastened to
purchase with money the favour of a saint. Above all, in
the hour of death, when the terrors of the future world
loomed darkly upon his mind, he saw in a gift or legacy to
the monks a sure means of effacing the most monstrous
crimes, and securing his ultimate happiness. A rich man
was soon scarcely deemed a Christian if he did not leave a
portion of his property to the Church, and the charters of innumerable
monasteries in every part of Europe attest the
vast tracts of land that were ceded by will to the monks, <q>for
the benefit of the soul</q> of the testator.<note place='foot'>See, on the causes of the wealth
of the monasteries, two admirable
dissertations by Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antich.
Italiane</hi>, lxvii., lxviii.; Hallam's
<hi rend='italic'>Middle Ages</hi>, ch. vii. part i.</note>
</p>

<p>
It has been observed by a great historian that we may
trace three distinct phases in the early history of the Church.
In the first period religion was a question of morals; in the
second period, which culminated in the fifth century, it had
become a question of orthodoxy; in the third period, which
dates from the seventh century, it was a question of munificence
to monasteries.<note place='foot'><q>Lors de l'établissement du
christianisme la religion avoit essentiellement
consisté dans l'enseignement
moral; elle avoit exercé les
cœurs et les âmes par la recherche
de ce qui étoit vraiment beau, vraiment
honnête. Au cinquième siècle
on l'avoit surtout attachée à l'orthodoxie,
au septième on l'avoit réduite à la bienfaisance envers les
couvens.</q>&mdash;Sismondi, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des
Français</hi>, tome ii. p. 50.</note> The despotism of Catholicism, and
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
the ignorance that followed the barbarian invasions, had repressed
the struggles of heresy, and in the period of almost
absolute darkness that continued from the sixth to the
twelfth century, the theological ideal of unquestioning faith
and of perfect unanimity was all but realised in the West.
All the energy that in previous ages had been expended in
combating heresy was now expended in acquiring wealth.
The people compounded for the most atrocious crimes by gifts
to shrines of those saints whose intercession was supposed to
be unfailing. The monks, partly by the natural cessation of
their old enthusiasm, partly by the absence of any hostile
criticism of their acts, and partly too by the very wealth
they had acquired, sank into gross and general immorality.
The great majority of them had probably at no time been
either saints actuated by a strong religious motive, nor yet
diseased and desponding minds seeking a refuge from the
world; they had been simply peasants, of no extraordinary
devotion or sensitiveness, who preferred an ensured subsistence,
with no care, little labour, a much higher social position
than they could otherwise acquire, and the certainty, as they
believed, of going to heaven, to the laborious and precarious
existence of the serf, relieved, indeed, by the privilege of
marriage, but exposed to military service, to extreme hardships,
and to constant oppression. Very naturally, when
they could do so with impunity, they broke their vows of
chastity. Very naturally, too, they availed themselves to the
full of the condition of affairs, to draw as much wealth as
possible into their community.<note place='foot'>Mr. Hallam, speaking of the
legends of the miracles of saints,
says: <q>It must not be supposed
that these absurdities were produced
as well as nourished by ignorance.
In most cases they were
the work of deliberate imposture.
Every cathedral or monastery had
its tutelar saint, and every saint
his legend, fabricated in order to
enrich the churches under his protection,
by exaggerating his virtues,
his miracles, and consequently his
power of serving those who paid
liberally for his patronage.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Middle
Ages</hi>, ch. ix. part i. I do not
think this passage makes sufficient
allowance for the unconscious formation
of many saintly myths, but
no impartial person can doubt its
substantial truth.</note> The belief in the approaching
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
end of the world, especially at the close of the tenth century,
the crusades, which gave rise to a profitable traffic in the
form of a pecuniary commutation of vows, and the black
death, which produced a paroxysm of religious fanaticism,
stimulated the movement. In the monkish chronicles, the
merits of sovereigns are almost exclusively judged by their
bounty to the Church, and in some cases this is the sole part
of their policy which has been preserved.<note place='foot'>Sismondi, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Français</hi>,
tome ii. pp. 54, 62-63.</note>
</p>

<p>
There were, no doubt, a few redeeming points in this dark
period. The Irish monks are said to have been honourably
distinguished for their reluctance to accept the lavish donations
of their admirers,<note place='foot'>Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 257.</note> and some missionary monasteries of
a high order of excellence were scattered through Europe.
A few legends, too, may be cited censuring the facility with
which money acquired by crime was accepted as an atonement
for crime.<note place='foot'><p>Durandus, a French bishop of
the thirteenth century, tells how,
<q>when a certain bishop was consecrating
a church built out of the
fruits of usury and pillage, he saw
behind the altar the devil in a pontifical
vestment, standing at the
bishop's throne, who said unto the
bishop, <q>Cease from consecrating
the church; for it pertaineth to
my jurisdiction, since it is built
from the fruits of usuries and robberies.</q>
Then the bishop and the
clergy having fled thence in fear,
immediately the devil destroyed
that church with a great noise.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Rationale
Divinorum</hi>, i. 6 (translated
for the Camden Society).
</p>
<p>
A certain St. Launomar is said
to have refused a gift for his monastery
from a rapacious noble,
because he was sure it was derived
from pillage. (Montalembert's
<hi rend='italic'>Moines d'Occident</hi>, tome ii.
pp. 350-351.) When prostitutes
were converted in the early Church,
it was the rule that the money of
which they had become possessed
should never be applied to ecclesiastical
purposes, but should be
distributed among the poor.</p></note> But these cases were very rare, and the religious
history of several centuries is little more than a history of
the rapacity of priests and of the credulity of laymen. In
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
England, the perpetual demands of the Pope excited a fierce
resentment; and we may trace with remarkable clearness,
in every page of Matthew Paris, the alienation of sympathy
arising from this cause, which prepared and foreshadowed
the final rupture of England from the Church. Ireland, on
the other hand, had been given over by two Popes to the
English invader, on the condition of the payment of Peter's
pence. The outrageous and notorious immorality of the
monasteries, during the century before the Reformation, was
chiefly due to their great wealth; and that immorality, as
the writings of Erasmus and Ulric von Hutten show, gave a
powerful impulse to the new movement, while the abuses of
the indulgences were the immediate cause of the revolt of
Luther. But these things arrived only after many centuries
of successful fraud. The religious terrorism that was unscrupulously
employed had done its work, and the chief riches of
Christendom had passed into the coffers of the Church.
</p>

<p>
It is, indeed, probable that religious terrorism played a
more important part in the monastic phase of Christianity
than it had done even in the great work of the conversion
of the Pagans. Although two or three amiable theologians
had made faint and altogether abortive attempts to question
the eternity of punishment; although there had been some
slight difference of opinion concerning the future of some
Pagan philosophers who had lived before the introduction of
Christianity, and also upon the question whether infants who
died unbaptised were only deprived of all joy, or were actually
subjected to never-ending agony, there was no question
as to the main features of the Catholic doctrine. According
to the patristic theologians, it was part of the gospel revelation
that the misery and suffering the human race endures
upon earth is but a feeble image of that which awaits
it in the future world; that all its members beyond the
Church, as well as a very large proportion of those who are
within its pale, are doomed to an eternity of agony in a
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
literal and undying fire. The monastic legends took up this
doctrine, which in itself is sufficiently revolting, and they
developed it with an appalling vividness and minuteness.
St. Macarius, it is said, when walking one day through the
desert, saw a skull upon the ground. He struck it with his
staff and it began to speak. It told him that it was the
skull of a Pagan priest who had lived before the introduction
of Christianity into the world, and who had accordingly been
doomed to hell. As high as the heaven is above the earth,
so high does the fire of hell mount in waves above the souls
that are plunged into it. The damned souls were pressed
together back to back, and the lost priest made it his single
entreaty to the saint that he would pray that they might
be turned face to face, for he believed that the sight of a
brother's face might afford him some faint consolation in the
eternity of agony that was before him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Verba Seniorum</hi>, Prol. § 172.</note> The story is well
known of how St. Gregory, seeing on a bas-relief a representation
of the goodness of Trajan to a poor widow, pitied the
Pagan emperor, whom he knew to be in hell, and prayed
that he might be released. He was told that his prayer was
altogether unprecedented; but at last, on his promising that
he would never offer such a prayer again, it was partially
granted. Trajan was not withdrawn from hell, but he was
freed from the torments which the remainder of the Pagan
world endured.<note place='foot'>This vision is not related by
St. Gregory himself, and some
Catholics are perplexed about it, on
account of the vision of another
saint, who afterwards asked whether
Trajan was saved, and received
for answer, <q>I wish men to rest in
ignorance of this subject, that the
Catholics may become stronger.
For this emperor, though he had
great virtues, was an unbaptised
infidel.</q> The whole subject of the
vision of St. Gregory is discussed
by Champagny, <hi rend='italic'>Les Antonins</hi>, tome
i. pp. 372-373. This devout writer
says, <q>Cette légende fut acceptée
par tout le moyen-âge, <emph>indulgent
pour les païens illustres</emph> et tout disposé
à les supposer chrétiens et
sauvés.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
An entire literature of visions depicting the torments of
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
hell was soon produced by the industry of the monks. The
apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus, which purported to describe
the descent of Christ into the lower world, contributed to
foster it; and St. Gregory the Great has related many visions
in a more famous work, which professed to be compiled with
scrupulous veracity from the most authentic sources,<note place='foot'>See the solemn asseveration of
the care which he took in going
only to the most credible and
authorised sources for his materials,
in the Preface to the First
Book of <hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi>.</note> and of
which it may be confidently averred that it scarcely contains
a single page which is not tainted with grotesque and deliberate
falsehood. Men, it was said, passed into a trance or
temporary death, and were then carried for a time to hell.
Among others, a certain man named Stephen, from whose
lips the saint declares that he had heard the tale, had died
by mistake. When his soul was borne to the gates of hell,
the Judge declared that it was another Stephen who was
wanted; the disembodied spirit, after inspecting hell, was
restored to its former body, and the next day it was known
that another Stephen had died.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> iv. 36.</note> Volcanoes were the portals
of hell, and a hermit had seen the soul of the Arian emperor
Theodoric, as St. Eucherius afterwards did the soul of
Charles Martel, carried down that in the Island of Lipari.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 30.</note>
The craters in Sicily, it was remarked, were continually
agitated, and continually increasing, and this, as St. Gregory
observes, was probably due to the impending ruin of the
world, when the great press of lost souls would render it
necessary to enlarge the approaches to their prisons.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 35.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the glimpses of hell that are furnished in the <q>Dialogues</q>
of St. Gregory appear meagre and unimaginative,
compared with those of some later monks. A long series
of monastic visions, of which that of St. Fursey, in the
seventh century, was one of the first, and which followed
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
in rapid succession, till that of Tundale, in the twelfth
century, professed to describe with the most detailed accuracy
the condition of the lost.<note place='foot'>The fullest collection of these
visions with which I am acquainted
is that made for the Philobiblion
Society (vol. ix.), by M. Delepierre,
called <hi rend='italic'>L'Enfer décrit par ceux qui
l'ont vu</hi>, of which I have largely
availed myself. See, too, Rusca <hi rend='italic'>De
Inferno</hi>, Wright's <hi rend='italic'>Purgatory of St.
Patrick</hi>, and an interesting collection
of visions given by Mr. Longfellow,
in his translation of Dante. The Irish
saints were, I am sorry to say, prominent
in producing this branch of
literature. St. Fursey, whose vision
is one of the earliest, and Tondale,
or Tundale, whose vision is one of
the most detailed, were both Irish.
The English historians contain
several of these visions. Bede relates
two or three&mdash;William of
Malmesbury that of Charles the
Fat; Matthew Paris three visions
of purgatory.</note> It is impossible to conceive more
ghastly, grotesque, and material conceptions of the future
world than they evince, or more hideous calumnies against
that Being who was supposed to inflict upon His creatures
such unspeakable misery. The devil was represented bound
by red-hot chains, on a burning gridiron in the centre of
hell. The screams of his never-ending agony made its rafters
to resound; but his hands were free, and with these he
seized the lost souls, crushed them like grapes against his
teeth, and then drew them by his breath down the fiery
cavern of his throat. Dæmons with hooks of red-hot
iron plunged souls alternately into fire and ice. Some of
the lost were hung up by their tongues, others were sawn
asunder, others gnawed by serpents, others beaten together on
an anvil and welded into a single mass, others boiled and
then strained through a cloth, others twined in the embraces
of dæmons whose limbs were of flame. The fire of earth,
it was said, was but a picture of that of hell. The latter was
so immeasurably more intense that it alone could be called
real. Sulphur was mixed with it, partly to increase its
heat, and partly, too, in order that an insufferable stench
might be added to the misery of the lost, while, unlike
other flames, it emitted, according to some visions, no light,
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
that the horror of darkness might be added to the horror of
pain. A narrow bridge spanned the abyss, and from it the
souls of sinners were plunged into the darkness that was
below.<note place='foot'>The narrow bridge over hell
(in some visions covered with
spikes), which is a conspicuous
feature in the Mohammedan pictures
of the future world, appears
very often in Catholic visions. See
Greg. Tur. iv. 33; St. Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi>
iv. 36; and the vision of Tundale,
in Delepierre.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such catalogues of horrors, though they now awake in an
educated man a sentiment of mingled disgust, weariness, and
contempt, were able for many centuries to create a degree of
panic and of misery we can scarcely realise. With the
exception of the heretic Pelagius, whose noble genius, anticipating
the discoveries of modern science, had repudiated the
theological notion of death having been introduced into the
world on account of the act of Adam, it was universally
held among Christians that all the forms of suffering
and dissolution that are manifested on earth were penal
inflictions. The destruction of the world was generally believed
to be at hand. The minds of men were filled with
images of the approaching catastrophe, and innumerable
legends of visible dæmons were industriously circulated. It
was the custom then, as it is the custom now, for Catholic
priests to stain the imaginations of young children by ghastly
pictures of future misery, to imprint upon the virgin mind
atrocious images which they hoped, not unreasonably, might
prove indelible.<note place='foot'>Few Englishmen, I imagine,
are aware of the infamous publications
written with this object, that
are circulated by the Catholic
priests among the poor. I have
before me a tract <q>for children and
young persons,</q> called <hi rend='italic'>The Sight of
Hell</hi>, by the Rev. J. Furniss, C.S.S.R.,
published <q>permissu superiorum,</q>
by Duffy (Dublin and London).
It is a detailed description of the
dungeons of hell, and a few sentences
may serve as a sample. <q>See!
on the middle of that red-hot floor
stands a girl; she looks about sixteen
years old. Her feet are bare.
She has neither shoes nor stockings....
Listen! she speaks. She
says, I have been standing on this
red-hot floor for years. Day and
night my only standing-place has
been this red-hot floor.... Look
at my burnt and bleeding feet. Let
me go off this burning floor for one
moment, only for one single short
moment.... The fourth dungeon
is the boiling kettle ... in the
middle of it there is a boy....
His eyes are burning like two burning
coals. Two long flames come
out of his ears.... Sometimes
he opens his mouth, and blazing
fire rolls out. But listen! there is
a sound like a kettle boiling....
The blood is boiling in the scalded
veins of that boy. The brain is
boiling and bubbling in his head.
The marrow is boiling in his bones....
The fifth dungeon is the red-hot
oven.... The little child is
in this red-hot oven. Hear how
it screams to come out. See how
it turns and twists itself about in
the fire. It beats its head against
the roof of the oven. It stamps its
little feet on the floor.... God
was very good to this child. Very
likely God saw it would get worse
and worse, and would never repent,
and so it would have to be punished
much more in hell. So God in His
mercy called it out of the world in
its early childhood.</q> If the reader
desires to follow this subject further,
he may glance over a companion
tract by the same reverend
gentleman, called <hi rend='italic'>A Terrible Judgment
on a Little Child</hi>; and also a
book on <hi rend='italic'>Hell</hi>, translated from the
Italian of Pinamonti, and with
illustrations depicting the various
tortures.</note> In hours of weakness and of sickness their
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
overwrought fancy seemed to see hideous beings hovering
around, and hell itself yawning to receive its victim. St.
Gregory describes how a monk, who, though apparently a
man of exemplary and even saintly piety, had been accustomed
secretly to eat meat, saw on his deathbed a fearful
dragon twining its tail round his body, and, with open jaws,
sucking his breath;<note place='foot'>St. Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> iv. 38.</note> and how a little boy of five years old,
who had learnt from his father to repeat blasphemous words,
saw, as he lay dying, exulting dæmons who were waiting to
carry him to hell.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 18.</note> To the jaundiced eye of the theologian,
all nature seemed stricken and forlorn, and its brightness and
beauty suggested no ideas but those of deception and of sin.
The redbreast, according to one popular legend, was commissioned
by the Deity to carry a drop of water to the souls of
unbaptised infants in hell, and its breast was singed in
piercing the flames.<note place='foot'>Alger's <hi rend='italic'>History of the Doctrine
of a Future Life</hi> (New York,
1866), p. 414. The ignis fatuus was
sometimes supposed to be the soul
of an unbaptised child. There is, I
believe, another Catholic legend
about the redbreast, of a very
different kind&mdash;that its breast was
stained with blood when it was
trying to pull out the thorns from
the crown of Christ.</note> In the calm, still hour of evening,
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
when the peasant boy asked why the sinking sun, as it dipped
beneath the horizon, flushed with such a glorious red, he was
answered, in the words of an old Saxon catechism, because it
is then looking into hell.<note place='foot'>Wright's <hi rend='italic'>Purgatory of St.
Patrick</hi>, p. 26. M. Delepierre
quotes a curious theory of Father
Hardouin (who is chiefly known
for his suggestion that the classics
were composed by the mediæval
monks) that the rotation of the
earth is caused by the lost souls
trying to escape from the fire that
is at the centre of the globe, climbing,
in consequence, on the inner
crust of the earth, which is the
wall of hell, and thus making the
whole revolve, as the squirrel by
climbing turns its cage! (<hi rend='italic'>L'Enfer
décrit par ceux qui l'ont vu</hi>, p. 151.)</note>
</p>

<p>
It is related in the vision of Tundale, that as he gazed
upon the burning plains of hell, and listened to the screams
of ceaseless and hopeless agony that were wrung from the
sufferers, the cry broke from his lips, <q>Alas, Lord! what
truth is there in what I have so often heard&mdash;the earth is
filled with the mercy of God?</q><note place='foot'>Delepierre, p. 70.</note> It is, indeed, one of the
most curious things in moral history, to observe how men
who were sincerely indignant with Pagan writers for attributing
to their divinities the frailties of an occasional jealousy
or an occasional sensuality&mdash;for representing them, in a word,
like men of mingled characters and passions&mdash;have nevertheless
unscrupulously attributed to their own Divinity a degree
of cruelty which may be confidently said to transcend the
utmost barbarity of which human nature is capable. Neither
Nero nor Phalaris could have looked complacently for ever on
millions enduring the torture of fire&mdash;most of them because
of a crime which was committed, not by themselves, but by
their ancestors, or because they had adopted some mistaken
conclusion on intricate questions of history or metaphysics.<note place='foot'>Thus, in a book which was
attributed (it is said erroneously) to
Jeremy Taylor, we find two singularly
unrhetorical and unimpassioned
chapters, deliberately enumerating
the most atrocious acts
of cruelty in human history, and
maintaining that they are surpassed
by the tortures inflicted by the
Deity. A few instances will suffice.
Certain persons <q>put rings of iron,
stuck full of sharp points of needles,
about their arms and feet, in such
a manner as the prisoners could
not move without wounding themselves;
then they compassed them
about with fire, to the end that,
standing still, they might be burnt
alive, and if they stirred the sharp
points pierced their flesh....
What, then, shall be the torment
of the damned where they shall
burn eternally without dying, and
without possibility of removing?...
Alexander, the son of Hyrcanus,
caused eight hundred to be
crucified, and whilst they were yet
alive caused their wives and children
to be murdered before their
eyes, that so they might not die
once, but many deaths. This rigour
shall not be wanting in hell....
Mezentius tied a living body to a
dead until the putrefied exhalations
of the dead had killed the living....
What is this in respect of
hell, when each body of the damned
is more loathsome and unsavoury
than a million of dead dogs?...
Bonaventure says, if one of the
damned were brought into this
world it were sufficient to infect
the whole earth.... We are
amazed to think of the inhumanity
of Phalaris, who roasted men alive
in his brazen bull. That was a
joy in respect of that fire of hell....
This torment ... comprises
as many torments as the body of
man has joints, sinews, arteries,
&amp;c., being caused by that penetrating
and real fire, of which this
temporal fire is but a painted fire....
What comparison will there
be between burning for a hundred
years' space, and to be burning
without interruption as long as God
is God?</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Contemplations on the
State of Man</hi>, book ii. ch. 6-7, in
Heber's Edition of the works of
Taylor.</note>
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
To those who do not regard such teaching as true, it must
appear without exception the most odious in the religious
history of the world, subversive of the very foundations of
morals, and well fitted to transform the man who at once
realised it, and accepted it with pleasure, into a monster of
barbarity. Of the writers of the mediæval period, certainly
one of the two or three most eminent was Peter Lombard,
whose <q>Sentences,</q> though now, I believe, but little read,
were for a long time the basis of all theological literature in
Europe. More than four thousand theologians are said to
have written commentaries upon them<note place='foot'>Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>Historiæ Theologiæ
cum Philosophia comparata Synopsis</hi>,
p. 29. Peter Lombard's work
was published in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1160.</note>&mdash;among others,
Albert the Great, St. Bonaventura, and St. Thomas Aquinas.
Nor is the work unworthy of its former reputation. Calm,
clear, logical, subtle, and concise, the author professes to expound
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
the whole system of Catholic theology and ethics,
and to reveal the interdependence of their various parts.
Having explained the position and the duties, he proceeds to
examine the prospects, of man. He maintains that until the
day of judgment the inhabitants of heaven and hell will
continually see one another; but that, in the succeeding
eternity, the inhabitants of heaven alone will see those of the
opposite world; and he concludes his great work by this
most impressive passage: <q>In the last place, we must enquire
whether the sight of the punishment of the condemned will
impair the glory of the blest, or whether it will augment
their beatitude. Concerning this, Gregory says the sight of
the punishment of the lost will not obscure the beatitude of
the just; for when it is accompanied by no compassion it can
be no diminution of happiness. And although their own
joys might suffice to the just, yet to their greater glory they
will see the pains of the evil, which by grace they have
escaped.... The elect will go forth, not indeed locally,
but by intelligence, and by a clear vision, to behold the
torture of the impious, and as they see them they will not
grieve. Their minds will be sated with joy as they gaze on
the unspeakable anguish of the impious, returning thanks
for their own freedom. Thus Esaias, describing the torments
of the impious, and the joy of the righteous in witnessing it,
says: <q>The elect in truth will go out and will see the corpses
of men who have prevaricated against Him; their worm
will not die, and they will be to the satiety of vision to all
flesh, that is to the elect. The just man will rejoice when
he shall see the vengeance.</q></q><note place='foot'><q>Postremo quæritur, An pœna
reproborum visa decoloret gloriam
beatorum? an eorum beatitudini
proficiat? De hoc ita Gregorius
ait, Apud animum justorum non obfuscat
beatitudinem aspecta pœna
reproborum; quia ubi jam compassio
miseriæ non erit, minuere
beatorum lætitiam non valebit. Et
licet justis sua gaudia sufficiant,
ad majorem gloriam vident pœnas
malorum quas per gratiam evaserunt....
Egredientur ergo electi,
non loco, sed intelligentia vel visione
manifesta ad videndum impiorum
cruciatus; quos videntes non dolore
afficientur sed lætitia satiabuntur,
agentes gratias de sua liberatione
visa impiorum ineffabili calamitate.
Unde Esaias impiorum tormenta
describens et ex eorum visione lætitiam
bonorum exprimens, ait,
Egredientur electi scilicet et videbunt
cadavera virorum qui prævaricati
sunt in me. Vermis eorum
non morietur et ignis non extinguetur,
et erunt usque ad satietatem
visionis omni carni, id est electis.
Lætabitur justus cum viderit vindictam.</q>&mdash;Peter
Lombard, <hi rend='italic'>Senten.</hi>
lib. iv. finis. These amiable views
have often been expressed both by
Catholic and by Puritan divines. See
Alger's <hi rend='italic'>Doctrine of a Future Life</hi>,
p. 541.</note>
</p>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<p>
This passion for visions of heaven and hell was, in fact,
a natural continuation of the passion for dogmatic definition,
which had raged during the fifth century. It was natural
that men, whose curiosity had left no conceivable question of
theology undefined, should have endeavoured to describe
with corresponding precision the condition of the dead.
Much, however, was due to the hallucinations of solitary
and ascetic life, and much more to deliberate imposture.
It is impossible for men to continue long in a condition of
extreme panic, and superstition speedily discovered remedies
to allay the fears it had created. If a malicious dæmon was
hovering around the believer, and if the jaws of hell were
opening to receive him, he was defended, on the other hand,
by countless angels; a lavish gift to a church or monastery
could always enlist a saint in his behalf, and priestly power
could protect him against the dangers which priestly sagacity
had revealed. When the angels were weighing the good and
evil deeds of a dead man, the latter were found by far to
preponderate; but a priest of St. Lawrence came in, and
turned the scale by throwing down among the former a
heavy gold chalice, which the deceased had given to the
altar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Legenda Aurea.</hi> There is a
curious fresco representing this
transaction, on the portal of the
church of St. Lorenzo, near Rome.</note> Dagobert was snatched from the very arms of dæmons
by St. Denis, St. Maurice, and St. Martin.<note place='foot'>Aimoni, <hi rend='italic'>De Gestis Francorum
Hist.</hi> iv. 34.</note> Charlemagne
was saved, because the monasteries he had built outweighed
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
his evil deeds.<note place='foot'>Turpin's <hi rend='italic'>Chronicle</hi>, ch. 32. In
the vision of Watlin, however (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
824), Charlemagne was seen tortured
in purgatory on account of
his excessive love of women. (Delepierre,
<hi rend='italic'>L'Enfer décrit par ceux
qui l'ont vu</hi>, pp. 27-28.)</note> Others, who died in mortal sin, were raised
from the dead at the desire of their patron saint, to expiate
their guilt. To amass relics, to acquire the patronage of
saints, to endow monasteries, to build churches, became the
chief part of religion, and the more the terrors of the unseen
world were unfolded, the more men sought tranquillity by
the consolations of superstition.<note place='foot'>As the Abbé Mably observes:
<q>On croyoit en quelque sorte dans
ces siècles grossiers que l'avarice
étoit le premier attribut de Dieu,
et que les saints faisoient un commerce
de leur crédit et de leur protection.
De-là les richesses immenses
données aux églises par des
hommes dont les mœurs déshonoroient
la religion.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Observations
sur l'Hist. de France</hi>, i. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The extent to which the custom of materialising religion
was carried, can only be adequately realised by those who
have examined the mediæval literature itself. That which
strikes a student in perusing this literature, is not so much
the existence of these superstitions, as their extraordinary
multiplication, the many thousands of grotesque miracles
wrought by saints, monasteries, or relics, that were deliberately
asserted and universally believed. Christianity had
assumed a form that was quite as polytheistic and quite as
idolatrous as the ancient Paganism. The low level of intellectual
cultivation, the religious feelings of half-converted
barbarians, the interests of the clergy, the great social importance
of the monasteries, and perhaps also the custom of
compounding for nearly all crimes by pecuniary fines, which
was so general in the penal system of the barbarian tribes,
combined in their different ways, with the panic created by
the fear of hell, in driving men in the same direction, and
the wealth and power of the clergy rose to a point that
enabled them to overshadow all other classes. They had
found, as has been well said, in another world, the standing-point
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
of Archimedes from which they could move this. No
other system had ever appeared so admirably fitted to endure
for ever. The Church had crushed or silenced every opponent
in Christendom. It had an absolute control over
education in all its branches and in all its stages. It had
absorbed all the speculative knowledge and art of Europe.
It possessed or commanded wealth, rank, and military power.
It had so directed its teaching, that everything which terrified
or distressed mankind drove men speedily into its arms,
and it had covered Europe with a vast network of institutions,
admirably adapted to extend and perpetuate its
power. In addition to all this, it had guarded with consummate
skill all the approaches to its citadel. Every
doubt was branded as a sin, and a long course of doubt
must necessarily have preceded the rejection of its tenets.
All the avenues of enquiry were painted with images of
appalling suffering, and of malicious dæmons. No sooner
did the worshipper begin to question any article of faith, or
to lose his confidence in the virtue of the ceremonies of his
Church, than he was threatened with a doom that no human
heroism could brave, that no imagination could contemplate
undismayed.
</p>

<p>
Of all the suffering that was undergone by those brave
men who in ages of ignorance and superstition dared to
break loose from the trammels of their Church, and who laid
the foundation of the liberty we now enjoy, it is this which
was probably the most poignant, and which is the least
realised. Our imaginations can reproduce with much vividness
gigantic massacres like those of the Albigenses or of
St. Bartholomew. We can conceive, too, the tortures of the
rack and of the boots, the dungeon, the scaffold, and the slow
fire. We can estimate, though less perfectly, the anguish
which the bold enquirer must have undergone from the
desertion of those he most dearly loved, from the hatred of
mankind, from the malignant calumnies that were heaped
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
upon his name. But in the chamber of his own soul, in the
hours of his solitary meditation, he must have found elements
of a suffering that was still more acute. Taught from his
earliest childhood to regard the abandonment of his hereditary
opinions as the most deadly of crimes, and to ascribe
it to the instigation of deceiving dæmons, persuaded that
if he died in a condition of doubt he must pass into a state
of everlasting torture, his imagination saturated with images
of the most hideous and appalling anguish, he found himself
alone in the world, struggling with his difficulties and his
doubts. There existed no rival sect in which he could take
refuge, and where, in the professed agreement of many minds,
he could forget the anathemas of the Church. Physical
science, that has disproved the theological theories which
attribute death to human sin, and suffering to Divine vengeance,
and all natural phenomena to isolated acts of Divine
intervention&mdash;historical criticism, which has dispelled so
many imposing fabrics of belief, traced so many elaborate
superstitions to the normal action of the undisciplined imagination,
and explained and defined the successive phases of
religious progress, were both unknown. Every comet that
blazed in the sky, every pestilence that swept over the land,
appeared a confirmation of the dark threats of the theologian.
A spirit of blind and abject credulity, inculcated as the first
of duties, and exhibited on all subjects and in all forms,
pervaded the atmosphere he breathed. Who can estimate
aright the obstacles against which a sincere enquirer in such
an age must have struggled? Who can conceive the secret
anguish he must have endured in the long months or years
during which rival arguments gained an alternate sway
over his judgment, while all doubt was still regarded as
damnable? And even when his mind was convinced, his
imagination would still often revert to his old belief. Our
thoughts in after years flow spontaneously, and even unconsciously,
in the channels that are formed in youth. In
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
moments when the controlling judgment has relaxed its
grasp, old intellectual habits reassume their sway, and
images painted on the imagination will live, when the intellectual
propositions on which they rested have been wholly
abandoned. In hours of weakness, of sickness, and of drowsiness,
in the feverish and anxious moments that are known
to all, when the mind floats passively upon the stream, the
phantoms which reason had exorcised must have often reappeared,
and the bitterness of an ancient tyranny must have
entered into his soul.
</p>

<p>
It is one of the greatest of the many services that were
rendered to mankind by the Troubadours, that they cast
such a flood of ridicule upon the visions of hell, by which
the monks had been accustomed to terrify mankind, that
they completely discredited and almost suppressed them.<note place='foot'>Many curious examples of the
way in which the Troubadours burlesqued
the monkish visions of hell
are given by Delepierre, p. 144.&mdash;Wright's
<hi rend='italic'>Purgatory of St. Patrick</hi>,
pp. 47-52.</note>
Whether, however, the Catholic mind, if unassisted by the
literature of Paganism and by the independent thinkers who
grew up under the shelter of Mohammedanism, could have
ever unwound the chains that had bound it, may well be
questioned. The growth of towns, which multiplied secular
interests and feelings, the revival of learning, the depression
of the ecclesiastical classes that followed the crusades, and, at
last, the dislocation of Christendom by the Reformation,
gradually impaired the ecclesiastical doctrine, which ceased
to be realised before it ceased to be believed. There was,
however, another doctrine which exercised a still greater
influence in augmenting the riches of the clergy, and in
making donations to the Church the chief part of religion.
I allude, of course, to the doctrine of purgatory.
</p>

<p>
A distinguished modern apologist for the middle ages
has made this doctrine the object of his special and very
characteristic eulogy, because, as he says, by providing a
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
finite punishment graduated to every variety of guilt, and
adapted for those who, without being sufficiently virtuous
to pass at once into heaven, did not appear sufficiently
vicious to pass into hell, it formed an indispensable corrective
to the extreme terrorism of the doctrine of eternal
punishment.<note place='foot'>Comte, <hi rend='italic'>Philosophie positive</hi>,
tome v. p. 269.</note> This is one of those theories which, though
exceedingly popular with a class of writers who are not without
influence in our day, must appear, I think, almost grotesque
to those who have examined the actual operation of the
doctrine during the middle ages. According to the practical
teaching of the Church, the expiatory powers at the disposal
of its clergy were so great, that those who died believing its
doctrines, and fortified in their last hours by its rites, had no
cause whatever to dread the terrors of hell. On the other
hand, those who died external to the Church had no prospect
of entering into purgatory. This latter was designed altogether
for true believers; it was chiefly preached at a time
when no one was in the least disposed to question the powers
of the Church to absolve any crime, however heinous, or to
free the worst men from hell, and it was assuredly never
regarded in the light of a consolation. Indeed, the popular
pictures of purgatory were so terrific that it may be doubted
whether the imagination could ever fully realise, though the
reason could easily recognise, the difference between this state
and that of the lost. The fire of purgatory, according to the
most eminent theologians, was like the fire of hell&mdash;a literal
fire, prolonged, it was sometimes said, for ages. The declamations
of the pulpit described the sufferings of the saved
souls in purgatory as incalculably greater than any that were
endured by the most wretched mortals upon earth.<note place='foot'><q>Saint-Bernard, dans son sermon
<hi rend='italic'>De obitu Humberti</hi>, affirme que
tous les tourments de cette vie sont
joies si on les compare à une seconde
des peines du purgatoire.
<q>Imaginez-vous donc, délicates
dames,</q> dit le père Valladier (1613)
dans son sermon du 3<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> dimanche
de l'Avent, <q>d'estre au travers de
vos chenets, sur vostre petit feu
pour une centaine d'ans: ce n'est
rien au respect d'un moment de purgatoire.
Mais si vous vistes jamais
tirer quelqu'un à quatre chevaux,
quelqu'un brusler à petit feu, enrager
de faim ou de soif, une heure de
purgatoire est pire que tout cela.</q></q>&mdash;Meray,
<hi rend='italic'>Les Libres Prêcheurs</hi>
(Paris, 1860), pp. 130-131 (an extremely
curious and suggestive
book). I now take up the first
contemporary book of popular Catholic
devotion on this subject which
is at hand, and read: <q>Compared
with the pains of purgatory, then,
all those wounds and dark prisons,
all those wild beasts, hooks of iron,
red-hot plates, &amp;c., which the holy
martyrs suffered, are nothing.</q>
<q>They (souls in purgatory) are in
a real, though miraculous manner,
tortured by fire, which is of the
same kind (says Bellarmine) as our
element fire.</q> <q>The Angelic Doctor
affirms <q>that the fire which torments
the damned is like the fire
which purges the elect.</q></q> <q>What
agony will not those holy souls
suffer when tied and bound with
the most tormenting chains of a
living fire like to that of hell! and
we, while able to make them free
and happy, shall we stand like uninterested
spectators?</q> <q>St. Austin
is of opinion that the pains of a
soul in purgatory during the time
required to open and shut one's
eye is more severe than what St.
Lawrence suffered on the gridiron;</q>
and much more to the same effect.
(<hi rend='italic'>Purgatory opened to the Piety of
the Faithful.</hi> Richardson, London.)</note> The rude
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
artists of mediævalism exhausted their efforts in depicting
the writhings of the dead in the flames that encircled them.
Innumerable visions detailed with a ghastly minuteness the
various kinds of torture they underwent,<note place='foot'>See Delepierre, Wright, and
Alger.</note> and the monk,
who described what he professed to have seen, usually ended
by the characteristic moral, that could men only realise those
sufferings, they would shrink from no sacrifice to rescue their
friends from such a state. A special place, it was said, was
reserved in purgatory for those who had been slow in paying
their tithes.<note place='foot'>This appears from the vision
of Thurcill. (Wright's <hi rend='italic'>Purgatory
of St. Patrick</hi>, p. 42.) Brompton
(<hi rend='italic'>Chronicon</hi>) tells of an English landlord
who had refused to pay tithes.
St. Augustine, having vainly reasoned
with him, at last convinced
him by a miracle. Before celebrating
mass he ordered all excommunicated
persons to leave the church,
whereupon a corpse got out of a
grave and walked away. The corpse,
on being questioned, said it was the
body of an ancient Briton who refused
to pay tithes, and had in consequence
been excommunicated and
damned.</note> St. Gregory tells a curious story of a man
who was, in other respects, of admirable virtue; but who,
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
in a contested election for the popedom, supported the wrong
candidate, and without, as it would appear, in any degree
refusing to obey the successful candidate when elected, continued
secretly of opinion that the choice was an unwise one.
He was accordingly placed for some time after death in
boiling water.<note place='foot'>Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> iv. 40.</note> Whatever may be thought of its other
aspects, it is impossible to avoid recognising in this teaching a
masterly skill in the adaptation of means to ends, which
almost rises to artistic beauty. A system which deputed its
minister to go to the unhappy widow in the first dark hour
of her anguish and her desolation, to tell her that he who
was dearer to her than all the world besides was now burning
in a fire, and that he could only be relieved by a gift of
money to the priests, was assuredly of its own kind not
without an extraordinary merit.
</p>

<p>
If we attempt to realise the moral condition of the society
of Western Europe in the period that elapsed between the downfall
of the Roman Empire and Charlemagne, during which the
religious transformations I have noticed chiefly arose, we shall
be met by some formidable difficulties. In the first place, our
materials are very scanty. From the year <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 642, when the
meagre chronicle of Fredigarius closes, to the biography of
Charlemagne by Eginhard, a century later, there is an almost
complete blank in trustworthy history, and we are reduced
to a few scanty and very doubtful notices in the chronicles of
monasteries, the lives of saints, and the decrees of Councils.
All secular literature had almost disappeared, and the thought
of posterity seems to have vanished from the world.<note place='foot'>As Sismondi says: <q>Pendant
quatre-vingts ans, tout au moins,
il n'y eut pas un Franc qui songeât
à transmettre à la postérité la mémoire
des événements contemporains,
et pendant le même espace
de temps il n'y eut pas un personnage
puissant qui ne bâtit des
temples pour la postérité la plus
reculée.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Français</hi>, tome
ii. p. 46.</note> Of the
first half of the seventh century, however, and of the two
centuries that preceded it, we have much information from
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
Gregory of Tours, and Fredigarius, whose tedious and repulsive
pages illustrate with considerable clearness the conflict of
races and the dislocation of governments that for centuries
existed. In Italy, the traditions and habits of the old Empire
had in some degree reasserted their sway; but in Gaul the
Church subsisted in the midst of barbarians, whose native
vigour had never been emasculated by civilisation and refined
by knowledge. The picture which Gregory of Tours gives us
is that of a society which was almost absolutely anarchical.
The mind is fatigued by the monotonous account of acts of
violence and of fraud springing from no fixed policy, tending
to no end, leaving no lasting impress upon the world.<note place='foot'>Gibbon says of the period
during which the Merovingian dynasty
reigned, that <q>it would be
difficult to find anywhere more vice
or less virtue.</q> Hallam reproduces
this observation, and adds: <q>The
facts of these times are of little other
importance than as they impress
on the mind a thorough notion of
the extreme wickedness of almost
every person concerned in them,
and consequently of the state to
which society was reduced.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
of the Middle Ages</hi>, ch. i. Dean
Milman is equally unfavourable
and emphatic in his judgment. <q>It
is difficult to conceive a more dark
and odious state of society than
that of France under her Merovingian
kings, the descendants of
Clovis, as described by Gregory of
Tours. In the conflict of barbarism
with Roman Christianity, barbarism
has introduced into Christianity
all its ferocity with none of its
generosity and magnanimity; its
energy shows itself in atrocity of
cruelty, and even of sensuality.
Christianity has given to barbarism
hardly more than its superstition
and its hatred of heretics
and unbelievers. Throughout, assassinations,
parricides, and fratricides
intermingle with adulteries
and rapes.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>History of Latin Christianity</hi>,
vol. i. p. 365.</note> The
two queens Frédégonde and Brunehaut rise conspicuous above
other figures for their fierce and undaunted ambition, for the
fascination they exercised over the minds of multitudes, and
for the number and atrocity of their crimes. All classes
seem to have been almost equally tainted with vice. We
read of a bishop named Cautinus, who had to be carried,
when intoxicated, by four men from the table;<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. iv. 12. Gregory mentions
(v. 41) another bishop who
used to become so intoxicated as to
be unable to stand; and St. Boniface,
after describing the extreme
sensuality of the clergy of his time,
adds that there are some bishops
<q>qui licet dicant se fornicarios
vel adulteros non esse, sed sunt
ebriosi et injuriosi,</q> &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
xlix.</note> who, upon
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
the refusal of one of his priests to surrender some private
property, deliberately ordered that priest to be buried alive,
and who, when the victim, escaping by a happy chance from
the sepulchre in which he had been immured, revealed the
crime, received no greater punishment than a censure.<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. iv. 12.</note> The
worst sovereigns found flatterers or agents in ecclesiastics.
Frédégonde deputed two clerks to murder Childebert,<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii. 29. She gave them
knives with hollow grooves, filled
with poison, in the blades.</note> and
another clerk to murder Brunehaut;<note place='foot'>Ibid. vii. 20.</note> she caused a bishop of
Rouen to be assassinated at the altar&mdash;a bishop and an archdeacon
being her accomplices;<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii. 31-41.</note> and she found in another
bishop, named Ægidius, one of her most devoted instruments
and friends.<note place='foot'>Ibid. v. 19.</note> The pope, St. Gregory the Great, was an
ardent flatterer of Brunehaut.<note place='foot'>See his very curious correspondence
with her.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> vi. 5,
50, 59; ix. 11, 117; xi. 62-63.</note> Gundebald, having murdered
his three brothers, was consoled by St. Avitus, the bishop of
Vienne, who, without intimating the slightest disapprobation
of the act, assured him that by removing his rivals he had
been a providential agent in preserving the happiness of his
people.<note place='foot'>Avitus, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> v. He adds: <q>Minuebat
regni felicitas numerum regalium
personarum.</q></note> The bishoprics were filled by men of notorious
debauchery, or by grasping misers.<note place='foot'>See the emphatic testimony of
St. Boniface in the eighth century.
<q>Modo autem maxima ex parte per
civitates episcopales sedes traditæ
sunt laicis cupidis ad possidendum,
vel adulteratis clericis, scortatoribus
et publicanis sæculariter ad
perfruendum.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> xlix. <q>ad Zachariam.</q>
The whole epistle contains
an appalling picture of the
clerical vices of the times.</note> The priests sometimes
celebrated the sacred mysteries <q>gorged with food and dull
with wine.</q><note place='foot'>More than one Council made
decrees about this. See the <hi rend='italic'>Vie
de St. Léger</hi>, by Dom Pitra, pp.
172-177.</note> They had already begun to carry arms,
and Gregory tells of two bishops of the sixth century
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
who had killed many enemies with their own hands.<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. iv. 43. St. Boniface,
at a much later period (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
742), talks of bishops <q>Qui pugnant
in exercitu armati et effundunt
propria manu sanguinem hominum.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
xlix.</note> There
was scarcely a reign that was not marked by some atrocious
domestic tragedy. There were few sovereigns who were not
guilty of at least one deliberate murder. Never, perhaps,
was the infliction of mutilation, and prolonged and agonising
forms of death, more common. We read, among other atrocities,
of a bishop being driven to a distant place of exile
upon a bed of thorns;<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. iv. 26.</note> of a king burning together his rebellious
son, his daughter-in-law, and their daughters;<note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 20.</note> of a
queen condemning a daughter she had had by a former marriage
to be drowned, lest her beauty should excite the passions
of her husband;<note place='foot'>Ibid. iii. 26.</note> of another queen endeavouring to strangle
her daughter with her own hands;<note place='foot'>Ibid. ix. 34.</note> of an abbot, compelling
a poor man to abandon his house, that he might commit
adultery with his wife, and being murdered, together with his
partner, in the act;<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii. 19. Gregory says
this story should warn clergymen
not to meddle with the
wives of other people, but <q>content
themselves with those that they may
possess without crime.</q> The abbot
had previously tried to seduce the
husband within the precincts of
the monastery, that he might murder
him.</note> of a prince who made it an habitual
amusement to torture his slaves with fire, and who buried
two of them alive, because they had married without his
permission;<note place='foot'>Ibid. v. 3.</note> of a bishop's wife, who, besides other crimes,
was accustomed to mutilate men and to torture women, by
applying red-hot irons to the most sensitive parts of their
bodies;<note place='foot'>Ibid. viii. 39. She was guilty
of many other crimes, which the
historian says <q>it is better to pass in
silence.</q> The bishop himself had
been guilty of outrageous and violent
tyranny. The marriage of
ecclesiastics appears at this time
to have been common in Gaul,
though the best men commonly deserted
their wives when they were
ordained. Another bishop's wife (iv.
36) was notorious for her tyranny.</note> of great numbers who were deprived of their ears
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
and noses, tortured through several days, and at last burnt
alive or broken slowly on the wheel. Brunehaut, at the
close of her long and in some respects great though guilty
career, fell into the hands of Clotaire, and the old queen,
having been subjected for three days to various kinds of
torture, was led out on a camel for the derision of the army,
and at last bound to the tail of a furious horse, and dashed
to pieces in its course.<note place='foot'>Fredigarius, xlii. The historian
describes Clotaire as a perfect
paragon of Christian graces.</note>
</p>

<p>
And yet this age was, in a certain sense, eminently
religious. All literature had become sacred. Heresy of
every kind was rapidly expiring. The priests and monks
had acquired enormous power, and their wealth was inordinately
increasing.<note place='foot'><q>Au sixième siècle on compte
214 établissements religieux des
Pyrénées à la Loire et des bouches
du Rhône aux Vosges.</q>&mdash;Ozanam,
<hi rend='italic'>Études germaniques</hi>, tome ii. p. 93.
In the two following centuries the
ecclesiastical wealth was enormously
increased.</note> Several sovereigns voluntarily abandoned
their thrones for the monastic life.<note place='foot'>Matthew of Westminster (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
757) speaks of no less than eight
Saxon kings having done this.</note> The seventh
century, which, together with the eighth, forms the darkest
period of the dark ages, is famous in the hagiology as
having produced more saints than any other century,
except that of the martyrs.<note place='foot'><q>Le septième siècle est celui
peut-être qui a donné le plus de
saints au calendrier.</q>&mdash;Sismondi,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de France</hi>, tome ii. p. 50.
<q>Le plus beau titre du septième
siècle à une réhabilitation c'est le
nombre considérable de saints qu'il
a produits.... Aucun siècle n'a
été ainsi glorifié sauf l'âge des
martyrs dont Dieu s'est réservé de
compter le nombre. Chaque année
fournit sa moisson, chaque jour a
sa gerbe.... Si donc il plaît à
Dieu et au Christ de répandre à
pleines mains sur un siècle les
splendeurs des saints, qu'importe
que l'histoire et la gloire humaine
en tiennent peu compte?</q>&mdash;Pitra,
<hi rend='italic'>Vie de St. Léger</hi>, Introd. p. x.-xi.
This learned and very credulous
writer (who is now a cardinal) afterwards
says that we have the record
of more than eight hundred saints
of the seventh century. (Introd. p.
lxxx.)</note>
</p>

<p>
The manner in which events were regarded by historians
was also exceedingly characteristic. Our principal authority,
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
Gregory of Tours, was a bishop of great eminence, and a
man of the most genuine piety, and of very strong affections.<note place='foot'>See, e.g., the very touching passage
about the death of his children,
v. 35.</note>
He describes his work as a record <q>of the virtues of saints,
and the disasters of nations;</q><note place='foot'>Lib. ii. Prologue.</note> and the student who turns to
his pages from those of the Pagan historians, is not more
struck by the extreme prominence he gives to ecclesiastical
events, than by the uniform manner in which he views
all secular events in their religious aspect, as governed
and directed by a special Providence. Yet, in questions
where the difference between orthodoxy and heterodoxy
is concerned, his ethics sometimes exhibit the most singular
distortion. Of this, probably the most impressive example
is the manner in which he has described the career of
Clovis, the great representative of orthodoxy.<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. ii. 27-43.</note> Having
recounted the circumstances of his conversion, Gregory
proceeds to tell us, with undisguised admiration, how that
chieftain, as the first-fruits of his doctrine, professed to be
grieved at seeing that part of Gaul was held by an Arian
sovereign; how he accordingly resolved to invade and
appropriate that territory; how, with admirable piety, he
commanded his soldiers to abstain from all devastations when
traversing the territory of St. Martin, and how several
miracles attested the Divine approbation of the expedition.
The war&mdash;which is the first of the long series of professedly
religious wars that have been undertaken by Christians&mdash;was
fully successful, and Clovis proceeded to direct his
ambition to new fields. In his expedition against the
Arians, he had found a faithful ally in his relative Sighebert,
the old and infirm king of the Ripuarian Franks. Clovis
now proceeded artfully to suggest to the son of Sighebert
the advantages that son might obtain by his father's death.
The hint was taken. Sighebert was murdered, and Clovis
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
sent ambassadors to the parricide, professing a warm friendship,
but with secret orders on the first opportunity to kill
him. This being done, and the kingdom being left entirely
without a head, Clovis proceeded to Cologne, the capital of
Sighebert; he assembled the people, professed with much
solemnity his horror of the tragedies that had taken place,
and his complete innocence of all connection with them;<note place='foot'>He observes how impossible it
was that he could be guilty of shedding
the blood of a relation: <q>Sed
in his ego nequaquam conscius
sum. Nec enim possum sanguinem
parentum meorum effundere.</q>&mdash;Greg.
Tur. ii. 40.</note>
but suggested that, as they were now without a ruler, they
should place themselves under his protection. The proposition
was received with acclamation. The warriors elected
him as their king, and thus, says the episcopal historian,
<q>Clovis received the treasures and dominions of Sighebert,
and added them to his own. Every day God caused his
enemies to fall beneath his hand, and enlarged his kingdom,
because he walked with a right heart before the Lord, and
did the things that were pleasing in His sight.</q><note place='foot'><q>Prosternebat enim quotidie
Deus hostes ejus sub manu ipsius,
et augebat regnum ejus eo quod
ambularet recto corde coram eo, et
faceret quæ placita erant in oculis
ejus.</q>&mdash;Greg. Tur. ii. 40.</note> His
ambition was, however, still unsated. He proceeded, in a
succession of expeditions, to unite the whole of Gaul under
his sceptre, invading, defeating, capturing, and slaying the
lawful sovereigns, who were for the most part his own
relations. Having secured himself against dangers from
without, by killing all his relations, with the exception of
his wife and children, he is reported to have lamented
before his courtiers his isolation, declaring that he had no
relations remaining in the world to assist him in his
adversity; but this speech, Gregory assures us, was a stratagem;
for the king desired to discover whether any possible
pretender to the throne had escaped his knowledge and his
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
sword. Soon after, he died, full of years and honours, and
was buried in a cathedral which he had built.
</p>

<p>
Having recounted all these things with unmoved composure,
Gregory of Tours requests his reader to permit him
to pause, to draw the moral of the history. It is the
admirable manner in which Providence guides all things
for the benefit of those whose opinions concerning the Trinity
are strictly orthodox. Having briefly referred to Abraham,
Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and David, all of whom are said to
have intimated the correct doctrine on this subject, and
all of whom were exceedingly prosperous, he passes to more
modern times. <q>Arius, the impious founder of the impious
sect, his entrails having fallen out, passed into the flames of
hell; but Hilary, the blessed defender of the undivided
Trinity, though exiled on that account, found his country in
Paradise. The King Clovis, who confessed the Trinity,
and by its assistance crushed the heretics, extended his
dominions through all Gaul. Alaric, who denied the Trinity,
was deprived of his kingdom and his subjects, and, what was
far worse, was punished in the future world.</q><note place='foot'>Lib. iii. Prologue. St. Avitus
enumerates in glowing terms the
Christian virtues of Clovis (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xli.),
but, as this was in a letter addressed
to the king himself, the eulogy may
easily be explained.</note>
</p>

<p>
It would be easy to cite other, though perhaps not quite
such striking, instances of the degree in which the moral
judgments of this unhappy age were distorted by superstition.<note place='foot'>Thus Hallam says: <q>There are
continual proofs of immorality in
the monkish historians. In the
history of Rumsey Abbey, one of
our best documents for Anglo-Saxon
times, we have an anecdote of a
bishop who made a Danish nobleman drunk,
that he might cheat
him out of an estate, which is told
with much approbation. Walter de
Hemingford records, with excessive
delight, the well-known story of
the Jews who were persuaded by
the captain of their vessel to walk
on the sands at low water till the
rising tide drowned them.</q>&mdash;Hallam's
<hi rend='italic'>Middle Ages</hi> (12th ed.), iii. p.
306.</note>
Questions of orthodoxy, or questions of fasting, appeared to
the popular mind immeasurably more important than what
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
we should now call the fundamental principles of right
and wrong. A law of Charlemagne, and also a law of the
Saxons, condemned to death any one who ate meat in Lent,<note place='foot'>Canciani, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Barbarorum</hi>,
vol. iii. p. 64. Canciani notices,
that among the Poles the teeth of
the offending persons were pulled
out. The following passage, from
Bodin, is, I think, very remarkable:
<q>Les loix et canons veulent qu'on
pardonne aux hérétiques repentis
(combien que les magistrats en
quelques lieux par cy-devant, y ont
eu tel esgard, que celui qui avoit
mangé de la chair au Vendredy
estoit bruslé tout vif, comme il fut
faict en la ville d'Angers l'an mil
cinq cens trente-neuf, s'il ne s'en
repentoit: et jaçoit qu'il se repentist
si estoit-il pendu par compassion).</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Démonomanie
des Sorciers</hi>,
p. 216.</note>
unless the priest was satisfied that it was a matter of absolute
necessity. The moral enthusiasm of the age chiefly drove
men to abandon their civic or domestic duties, to immure
themselves in monasteries, and to waste their strength by
prolonged and extravagant maceration.<note place='foot'>A long list of examples of extreme
maceration, from lives of the
saints of the seventh and eighth
centuries is given by Pitra, <hi rend='italic'>Vie de
St. Léger</hi>, Introd. pp. cv.-cvii.</note> Yet, in the midst
of all this superstition, there can be no question that in
some respects the religious agencies were operating for good.
The monastic bodies that everywhere arose, formed secure
asylums for the multitudes who had been persecuted by
their enemies, constituted an invaluable counterpoise to the
rude military forces of the time, familiarised the imagination
of men with religious types that could hardly fail in some
degree to soften the character, and led the way in most
forms of peaceful labour. When men, filled with admiration
at the reports of the sanctity and the miracles of some
illustrious saint, made pilgrimages to behold him, and found
him attired in the rude garb of a peasant, with thick shoes,
and with a scythe on his shoulder, superintending the labours
of the farmers,<note place='foot'>This was related of St. Equitius.&mdash;Greg.
<hi rend='italic'>Dialog.</hi> i. 4.</note> or sitting in a small attic mending lamps,<note place='foot'>Ibid. i. 5. This saint was
named Constantius.</note>
whatever other benefit they might derive from the interview,
they could scarcely fail to return with an increased sense of
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
the dignity of labour. It was probably at this time as much
for the benefit of the world as of the Church, that the
ecclesiastical sanctuaries and estates should remain inviolate,
and the numerous legends of Divine punishment having
overtaken those who transgressed them,<note place='foot'>A vast number of miracles of
this kind are recorded. See, e.g.,
Greg. Tur. <hi rend='italic'>De Miraculis</hi>, i. 61-66;
<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iv. 49. Perhaps the most
singular instance of the violation of
the sanctity of the church was that
by the nuns of a convent founded
by St. Radegunda. They, having
broken into rebellion, four bishops,
with their attendant clergy, went
to compose the dispute, and having
failed, excommunicated the rebels,
whereupon the nuns almost beat
them to death in the church.&mdash;Greg.
Tur. ix. 41.</note> attest the zeal with
which the clergy sought to establish that inviolability. The
great sanctity that was attached to holidays was also an
important boon to the servile classes. The celebration of the
first day of the week, in commemoration of the resurrection,
and as a period of religious exercises, dates from the earliest
age of the Church. The Christian festival was carefully
distinguished from the Jewish Sabbath, with which it never
appears to have been confounded till the close of the sixteenth
century; but some Jewish converts, who considered
the Jewish law to be still in force, observed both days. In
general, however, the Christian festival alone was observed,
and the Jewish Sabbatical obligation, as St. Paul most
explicitly affirms, no longer rested upon the Christians. The
grounds of the observance of Sunday were the manifest
propriety and expediency of devoting a certain portion of
time to devout exercises, the tradition which traced the
sanctification of Sunday to apostolic times, and the right of
the Church to appoint certain seasons to be kept holy by its
members. When Christianity acquired an ascendancy in the
Empire, its policy on this subject was manifested in one of
the laws of Constantine, which, without making any direct
reference to religious motives, ordered that, <q>on the day of
the sun,</q> no servile work should be performed except
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
agriculture, which, being dependent on the weather, could
not, it was thought, be reasonably postponed. Theodosius
took a step further, and suppressed the public spectacles on
that day. During the centuries that immediately followed
the dissolution of the Roman Empire, the clergy devoted
themselves with great and praiseworthy zeal to the suppression
of labour both on Sundays and on the other leading Church
holidays. More than one law was made, forbidding all
Sunday labour, and this prohibition was reiterated by
Charlemagne in his Capitularies.<note place='foot'>See Canciani, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Barbarorum</hi>,
vol. iii. pp. 19, 151.</note> Several Councils made
decrees on the subject,<note place='foot'>Much information about these
measures is given by Dr. Hessey,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Bampton Lectures on Sunday</hi>.
See especially, lect. 3. See, too,
Moehler, <hi rend='italic'>Le Christianisme et l'Esclavage</hi>,
pp. 186-187.</note> and several legends were circulated,
of men who had been afflicted miraculously with disease or
with death, for having been guilty of this sin.<note place='foot'>Gregory of Tours enumerates
some instances of this in his extravagant
book <hi rend='italic'>De Miraculis</hi>, ii. 11;
iv. 57; v. 7. One of these cases,
however, was for having worked on
the day of St. John the Baptist.
Some other miracles of the same
nature, taken, I believe, from English
sources, are given in Hessey's
<hi rend='italic'>Sunday</hi> (3rd edition), p. 321.</note> Although
the moral side of religion was greatly degraded or forgotten,
there was, as I have already intimated, one important exception.
Charity was so interwoven with the superstitious
parts of ecclesiastical teaching, that it continued to grow and
nourish in the darkest period. Of the acts of Queen Bathilda,
it is said we know nothing except her donations to the
monasteries, and the charity with which she purchased slaves
and captives, and released them or converted them into
monks.<note place='foot'>Compare Pitra, <hi rend='italic'>Vie de St.-Léger</hi>,
p. 137. Sismondi, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des
Français</hi>, tome ii. pp. 62-63.</note> While many of the bishops were men of gross and
scandalous vice, there were always some who laboured
assiduously in the old episcopal vocation of protecting the
oppressed, interceding for the captives, and opening their
sanctuaries to the fugitives. St. Germanus, a bishop of Paris,
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
near the close of the sixth century, was especially famous for
his zeal in ransoming captives.<note place='foot'>See a remarkable passage from
his life, cited by Guizot, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la
Civilisation en France</hi>, xvii<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> leçon.
The English historians contain
several instances of the activity of
charity in the darkest period. Alfred
and Edward the Confessor
were conspicuous for it. Ethelwolf
is said to have provided, <q>for the
good of his soul,</q> that, till the day
of judgment, one poor man in ten
should be provided with meat,
drink, and clothing. (Asser's <hi rend='italic'>Life
of Alfred</hi>.) There was a popular
legend that a poor man having
in vain asked alms of some sailors,
all the bread in their vessel was
turned into stone. (Roger of Wendover,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 606.) See, too, another
legend of charity in Matthew of
Westminster, <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 611.</note> The fame he acquired was
so great, that prisoners are said to have called upon him
to assist them, in the interval between his death and his
burial; and the body of the saint becoming miraculously
heavy, it was found impossible to carry it to the grave till
the captives had been released.<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> v. 8.</note> In the midst of the complete
eclipse of all secular learning, in the midst of a reign of
ignorance, imposture, and credulity which cannot be paralleled
in history, there grew up a vast legendary literature, clustering
around the form of the ascetic; and the lives of the saints,
among very much that is grotesque, childish, and even
immoral, contain some fragments of the purest and most
touching religious poetry.<note place='foot'>M. Guizot has given several
specimens of this (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Civilis.</hi>
xvii<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> leçon).</note>
</p>

<p>
But the chief title of the period we are considering, to
the indulgence of posterity, lies in its missionary labours.
The stream of missionaries which had at first flowed from
Palestine and Italy began to flow from the West. The
Irish monasteries furnished the earliest, and probably the
most numerous, labourers in the field. A great portion of
the north of England was converted by the Irish monks of
Lindisfarne. The fame of St. Columbanus in Gaul, in
Germany, and in Italy, for a time even balanced that of St.
Benedict himself, and the school which he founded at Luxeuil
became the great seminary for mediæval missionaries, while
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
the monastery he planted at Bobbio continued to the present
century. The Irish missionary, St. Gall, gave his name to
a portion of Switzerland he had converted, and a crowd of
other Irish missionaries penetrated to the remotest forests of
Germany. The movement which began with St. Columba
in the middle of the sixth century, was communicated to
England and Gaul about a century later. Early in the
eighth century it found a great leader in the Anglo-Saxon
St. Boniface, who spread Christianity far and wide through
Germany, and at once excited and disciplined an ardent
enthusiasm, which appears to have attracted all that was
morally best in the Church. During about three centuries,
and while Europe had sunk into the most extreme moral,
intellectual, and political degradation, a constant stream of
missionaries poured forth from the monasteries, who spread
the knowledge of the Cross and the seeds of a future civilisation
through every land, from Lombardy to Sweden.<note place='foot'>This portion of mediæval history
has lately been well traced
by Mr. Maclear, in his <hi rend='italic'>History of
Christian Missions in the Middle
Ages</hi> (1863). See, too, Montalembert's
<hi rend='italic'>Moines d'Occident</hi>; Ozanam's
<hi rend='italic'>Études germaniques</hi>. The original
materials are to be found in Bede,
and in the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi>&mdash;especially
that of St. Columba, by
Adamnan. On the French missionaries,
see the Benedictine <hi rend='italic'>Hist. lit.
de la France</hi>, tome iv. p. 5; and on
the English missionaries, Sharon
Turner's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of England</hi>, book x.
ch. ii.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the whole, however, it would be difficult to exaggerate
the superstition and the vice of the period between the dissolution
of the Empire and the reign of Charlemagne. But
in the midst of the chaos the elements of a new society may
be detected, and we may already observe in embryo the
movement which ultimately issued in the crusades, the feudal
system, and chivalry. It is exclusively with the moral
aspect of this movement that the present work is concerned,
and I shall endeavour, in the remainder of this
chapter, to describe and explain its incipient stages. It
consisted of two parts&mdash;a fusion of Christianity with the
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
military spirit, and an increasing reverence for secular
rank.
</p>

<p>
It had been an ancient maxim of the Greeks, that no
more acceptable gifts can be offered in the temples of the
gods, than the trophies won from an enemy in battle.<note place='foot'>Dion Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Or.</hi> ii. (<hi rend='italic'>De
Regno</hi>).</note> Of
this military religion Christianity had been at first the
extreme negation. I have already had occasion to observe
that it had been one of its earliest rules that no arms should
be introduced within the church, and that soldiers returning
even from the most righteous war should not be admitted to
communion until after a period of penance and purification.
A powerful party, which counted among its leaders Clement
of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, Lactantius, and Basil,
maintained that all warfare was unlawful for those who had
been converted; and this opinion had its martyr in the celebrated
Maximilianus, who suffered death under Diocletian
solely because, having been enrolled as a soldier, he declared
that he was a Christian, and that therefore he could not
fight. The extent to which this doctrine was disseminated
has been suggested with much plausibility as one of the
causes of the Diocletian persecution.<note place='foot'>Gibbon, ch. xvi.</note> It was the subject of
one of the reproaches of Celsus; and Origen, in reply, frankly
accepted the accusation that Christianity was incompatible
with military service, though he maintained that the prayers
of the Christians were more efficacious than the swords of
the legions.<note place='foot'>Origen, <hi rend='italic'>Cels.</hi> lib. viii.</note> At the same time, there can be no question
that many Christians, from a very early date, did enlist in
the army, and that they were not cut off from the Church.
The legend of the thundering legion, under Marcus Aurelius,
whatever we may think of the pretended miracle, attested
the fact, and it is expressly asserted by Tertullian.<note place='foot'><q>Navigamus et nos vobiscum
et militamus.</q>&mdash;Tert. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> xlii.
See, too, Grotius <hi rend='italic'>De Jure</hi>, i. cap. ii.</note> The
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
first fury of the Diocletian persecution fell upon Christian
soldiers, and by the time of Constantine the army appears
to have become, in a great degree, Christian. A Council of
Arles, under Constantine, condemned soldiers who, through
religious motives, deserted their colours; and St. Augustine
threw his great influence into the same scale. But even
where the calling was not regarded as sinful, it was strongly
discouraged. The ideal or type of supreme excellence conceived
by the imagination of the Pagan world and to which
all their purest moral enthusiasm naturally aspired, was the
patriot and soldier. The ideal of the Catholic legends was
the ascetic, whose first duty was to abandon all secular
feelings and ties. In most family circles the conflict between
the two principles appeared, and in the moral atmosphere of
the fourth and fifth centuries it was almost certain that
every young man who was animated by any pure or genuine
enthusiasm would turn from the army to the monks. St.
Martin, St. Ferreol, St. Tarrachus, and St. Victricius, were
among those who through religious motives abandoned the
army.<note place='foot'>See an admirable dissertation
on the opinions of the early Christians
about military service, in Le
Blant, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptions chrétiennes de la
Gaule</hi>, tome i. pp. 81-87. The
subject is frequently referred to by
Barbeyrac, <hi rend='italic'>Morale des Pères</hi>, and
Grotius, <hi rend='italic'>De Jure</hi>, lib. i. cap. ii.</note> When Ulphilas translated the Bible into Gothic, he
is said to have excepted the four books of Kings, through
fear that they might encourage the martial disposition of the
barbarians.<note place='foot'>Philostorgius, ii. 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
The first influence that contributed to bring the military
profession into friendly connection with religion was the
received doctrine concerning the Providential government
of affairs. It was generally taught that all national catastrophes
were penal inflictions, resulting, for the most part,
from the vices or the religious errors of the leading men, and
that temporal prosperity was the reward of orthodoxy and
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
virtue. A great battle, on the issue of which the fortunes of
a people or of a monarch depended, was therefore supposed
to be the special occasion of Providential interposition, and
the hope of obtaining military success became one of the
most frequent motives of conversion. The conversion of
Constantine was professedly, and the conversion of Clovis
was perhaps really, due to the persuasion that the Divine
interposition had in a critical moment given them the
victory; and I have already noticed how large a part must
be assigned to this order of ideas in facilitating the progress
of Christianity among the barbarians. When a cross was
said to have appeared miraculously to Constantine, with an
inscription announcing the victory of the Milvian bridge;
when the same holy sign, adorned with the sacred monogram,
was carried in the forefront of the Roman armies;
when the nails of the cross, which Helena had brought
from Jerusalem, were converted by the emperor into a
helmet, and into bits for his war-horse, it was evident that
a great change was passing over the once pacific spirit of the
Church.<note place='foot'>See some excellent remarks on
this change, in Milman's <hi rend='italic'>History
of Christianity</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 287-288.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many circumstances conspired to accelerate it. Northern
tribes, who had been taught that the gates of the Walhalla
were ever open to the warrior who presented himself stained
with the blood of his vanquished enemies, were converted to
Christianity; but they carried their old feelings into their
new creed. The conflict of many races, and the paralysis of
all government that followed the fall of the Empire, made
force everywhere dominant, and petty wars incessant. The
military obligations attached to the <q>benefices</q> which the
sovereigns gave to their leading chiefs, connected the idea
of military service with that of rank still more closely than
it had been connected before, and rendered it doubly honourable
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
in the eyes of men. Many bishops and abbots, partly
from the turbulence of their times and characters, and partly,
at a later period, from their position as great feudal lords,
were accustomed to lead their followers in battle; and this
custom, though prohibited by Charlemagne, may be traced
to so late a period as the battle of Agincourt.<note place='foot'>Mably, <hi rend='italic'>Observations sur l'Histoire de France</hi>, i. 6; Hallam's <hi rend='italic'>Middle
Ages</hi>, ch. ii. part ii.</note>
</p>

<p>
The stigma which Christianity had attached to war was
thus gradually effaced. At the same time, the Church
remained, on the whole, a pacific influence. War was
rather condoned than consecrated, and, whatever might be
the case with a few isolated prelates, the Church did nothing
to increase or encourage it. The transition from the almost
Quaker tenets of the primitive Church to the essentially
military Christianity of the Crusades was chiefly due to
another cause&mdash;to the terrors and to the example of Mohammedanism.
</p>

<p>
This great religion, which so long rivalled the influence
of Christianity, had indeed spread the deepest and most
justifiable panic through Christendom. Without any of
those aids to the imagination which pictures and images
can furnish, without any elaborate sacerdotal organisation,
preaching the purest Monotheism among ignorant and barbarous
men, and inculcating, on the whole, an extremely
high and noble system of morals, it spread with a rapidity
and it acquired a hold over the minds of its votaries, which
it is probable that no other religion has altogether equalled.
It borrowed from Christianity that doctrine of salvation by
belief, which is perhaps the most powerful impulse that can
be applied to the characters of masses of men, and it elaborated
so minutely the charms of its sensual heaven, and the
terrors of its material hell, as to cause the alternative to
appeal with unrivalled force to the gross imaginations of the
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
people. It possessed a book which, however inferior to that
of the opposing religion, has nevertheless been the consolation
and the support of millions in many ages. It taught a fatalism
which in its first age nerved its adherents with a matchless
military courage, and which, though in later days it has
often paralysed their active energies, has also rarely failed to
support them under the pressure of inevitable calamity.
But, above all, it discovered the great, the fatal secret of
uniting indissolubly the passion of the soldier with the
passion of the devotee. Making the conquest of the infidel
the first of duties, and proposing heaven as the certain
reward of the valiant soldier, it created a blended enthusiasm
that soon overpowered the divided counsels and the
voluptuous governments of the East, and, within a century
of the death of Mohammed, his followers had almost extirpated
Christianity from its original home, founded great monarchies
in Asia and Africa, planted a noble, though
transient and exotic, civilisation in Spain, menaced the
capital of the Eastern empire, and, but for the issue of a
single battle, they would probably have extended their
sceptre over the energetic and progressive races of Central
Europe. The wave was broken by Charles Martel, at the
battle of Poitiers, and it is now useless to speculate what
might have been the consequences had Mohammedanism
unfurled its triumphant banner among those Teutonic tribes
who have so often changed their creed, and on whom the
course of civilisation has so largely depended. But one
great change was in fact achieved. The spirit of Mohammedanism
slowly passed into Christianity, and transformed
it into its image. The spectacle of an essentially military
religion fascinated men who were at once very warlike and
very superstitious. The panic that had palsied Europe was after
a long interval succeeded by a fierce reaction of resentment.
Pride and religion conspired to urge the Christian warriors
against those who had so often defeated the armies and
wasted the territory of Christendom, who had shorn the
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
empire of the Cross of many of its fairest provinces, and
profaned that holy city which was venerated not only for its
past associations, but also for the spiritual blessings it could
still bestow upon the pilgrim. The papal indulgences proved
not less efficacious in stimulating the military spirit than the
promises of Mohammed, and for about two centuries every
pulpit in Christendom proclaimed the duty of war with the
unbeliever, and represented the battle-field as the sure path
to heaven. The religious orders which arose united the
character of the priest with that of the warrior, and when,
at the hour of sunset, the soldier knelt down to pray before
his cross, that cross was the handle of his sword.
</p>

<p>
It would be impossible to conceive a more complete
transformation than Christianity had thus undergone, and it
is melancholy to contrast with its aspect during the crusades
the impression it had once most justly made upon the world,
as the spirit of gentleness and of peace encountering the
spirit of violence and war. Among the many curious habits
of the Pagan Irish, one of the most significant was that of
perpendicular burial. With a feeling something like that
which induced Vespasian to declare that a Roman emperor
should die standing, the Pagan warriors shrank from the
notion of being prostrate even in death, and they appear to
have regarded this martial burial as a special symbol of
Paganism. An old Irish manuscript tells how, when
Christianity had been introduced into Ireland, a king of
Ulster on his deathbed charged his son never to become a
Christian, but to be buried standing upright like a man
in battle, with his face for ever turned to the south, defying
the men of Leinster.<note place='foot'>Wakeman's <hi rend='italic'>Archæologia Hibernica</hi>,
p. 21. However, Giraldus
Cambrensis observes that the Irish
saints were peculiarly vindictive,
and St. Columba and St. Comgall
are said to have been leaders in a
sanguinary conflict about a church
near Coleraine. See Reeve's edition
of Adamnan's <hi rend='italic'>Life of St. Columba</hi>,
pp. lxxvii. 253.</note> As late as the sixteenth century, it is
said that in some parts of Ireland children were baptised by
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
immersion; but the right arms of the males were carefully
held above the water, in order that, not having been dipped
in the sacred stream, they might strike the more deadly
blow.<note place='foot'>Campion's <hi rend='italic'>Historie of Ireland</hi> (1571), book i. ch. vi.</note>
</p>

<p>
It had been boldly predicted by some of the early Christians
that the conversion of the world would lead to the establishment
of perpetual peace. In looking back, with our
present experience, we are driven to the melancholy conclusion
that, instead of diminishing the number of wars, ecclesiastical
influence has actually and very seriously increased it. We may
look in vain for any period since Constantine, in which the
clergy, as a body, exerted themselves to repress the military
spirit, or to prevent or abridge a particular war, with an energy
at all comparable to that which they displayed in stimulating
the fanaticism of the crusaders, in producing the atrocious
massacre of the Albigenses, in embittering the religious contests
that followed the Reformation. Private wars were, no
doubt, in some degree repressed by their influence; for the
institution of the <q>Truce of God</q> was for a time of much
value, and when, towards the close of the middle ages, the
custom of duels arose, it was strenuously condemned by the
clergy; but we can hardly place any great value on their
exertions in this field, when we remember that duels were
almost or altogether unknown to the Pagan world; that,
having arisen in a period of great superstition, the anathemas
of the Church were almost impotent to discourage them; and
that in our own century they are rapidly disappearing before
the simple censure of an industrial society. It is possible&mdash;though
it would, I imagine, be difficult to prove it&mdash;that the
mediatorial office, so often exercised by bishops, may sometimes
have prevented wars; and it is certain that during the
period of the religious wars, so much military spirit existed
in Europe that it must necessarily have found a vent, and
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
under no circumstances could the period have been one of
perfect peace. But when all these qualifications have been
fully admitted, the broad fact will remain, that, with the
exception of Mohammedanism, no other religion has done so
much to produce war as was done by the religious teachers of
Christendom during several centuries. The military fanaticism
evoked by the indulgences of the popes, by the exhortations
of the pulpit, by the religious importance attached to
the relics at Jerusalem, and by the prevailing hatred of misbelievers,
has scarcely ever been equalled in its intensity, and
it has caused the effusion of oceans of blood, and has been
productive of incalculable misery to the world. Religious
fanaticism was a main cause of the earlier wars, and an
important ingredient in the later ones. The peace principles,
that were so common before Constantine, have found scarcely
any echo except from Erasmus, the Anabaptists, and the
Quakers;<note place='foot'>It seems curious to find in so
calm and unfanatical a writer as
Justus Lipsius the following passage:
<q>Jam et invasio quædam
legitima videtur etiam sine injuria,
ut in barbaros et moribus aut <emph>religione</emph>
prorsum a nobis abhorrentes.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Politicorum
sive Civilis Doctrinæ
libri</hi> (Paris, 1594), lib. iv. ch. ii.
cap. iv.</note> and although some very important pacific agencies
have arisen out of the industrial progress of modern times,
these have been, for the most part, wholly unconnected with,
and have in some cases been directly opposed to, theological
interests.
</p>

<p>
But although theological influences cannot reasonably be
said to have diminished the number of wars, they have had a
very real and beneficial effect in diminishing their atrocity.
On few subjects have the moral opinions of different ages
exhibited so marked a variation as in their judgments of
what punishment may justly be imposed on a conquered
enemy, and these variations have often been cited as an
argument against those who believe in the existence of
natural moral perceptions. To those, however, who accept
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
that doctrine, with the limitations that have been stated in the
first chapter, they can cause no perplexity. In the first dawning
of the human intelligence (as I have said) the notion of duty,
as distinguished from that of interest, appears, and the mind,
in reviewing the various emotions by which it is influenced,
recognises the unselfish and benevolent motives as essentially
and generically superior to the selfish and the cruel. But it
is the general condition of society alone that determines the
standard of benevolence&mdash;the classes towards which every
good man will exercise it. At first, the range of duty is the
family, the tribe, the state, the confederation. Within these
limits every man feels himself under moral obligations to
those about him; but he regards the outer world as we
regard wild animals, as beings upon whom he may justifiably
prey. Hence, we may explain the curious fact that the terms
brigand or corsair conveyed in the early stages of society no
notion of moral guilt.<note place='foot'><q>Con l'occasione di queste cose
Plutarco nel <hi rend='italic'>Teseo</hi> dice che gli eroi
si recavano a grande onore e si reputavano
in pregio d'armi con l'esser
chiamati ladroni; siccome a' tempi
barbari ritornati quello di Corsale
era titolo riputato di signoria;
d'intorno a' quali tempi venuto Solone,
si dice aver permesso nelle
sue leggi le società per cagion di
prede; tanto Solone ben intese
questa nostra compiuta Umanità,
nella quale costoro non godono del
diritto natural delle genti! Ma
quel che fa più maraviglia è che
Platone ed Aristotile posero il ladroneccio
fralle spezie della caccia
e con tali e tanti filosofi d'una gente
umanissima convengono con la loro
barbarie i Germani antichi; appo
i quali al referire di Cesare ì ladronecci
non solo non eran infami, ma
si tenevano tra gli esercizi della virtù
siccome tra quelli che per costume
non applicando ad arte alcuna così
fuggivano l'ozio.</q>&mdash;Vico, <hi rend='italic'>Scienza
Nuova</hi>, ii. 6. See, too, Whewell's
<hi rend='italic'>Elements of Morality</hi>, book vi. ch. ii.</note> Such men were looked upon simply
as we look upon huntsmen, and if they displayed courage and
skill in their pursuit, they were deemed fit subjects for
admiration. Even in the writings of the most enlightened
philosophers of Greece, war with barbarians is represented as
a form of chase, and the simple desire of obtaining the barbarians
as slaves was considered a sufficient reason for invading
them. The right of the conqueror to kill his captives
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
was generally recognised, nor was it at first restricted by any
considerations of age or sex. Several instances are recorded
of Greek and other cities being deliberately destroyed by
Greeks or by Romans, and the entire populations ruthlessly
massacred.<note place='foot'>The ancient right of war is
fully discussed by Grotius, <hi rend='italic'>De Jure</hi>,
lib. iii. See, especially, the horrible
catalogue of tragedies in cap. 4.
The military feeling that regards
capture as disgraceful, had probably
some, though only a very subordinate,
influence in producing
cruelty to the prisoners.</note> The whole career of the early republic of Rome,
though much idealised and transfigured by later historians,
was probably governed by these principles.<note place='foot'><q>Le jour où Athènes décréta
que tous les Mityléniens, sans distinction
de sexe ni d'âge, seraient
exterminés, elle ne croyait pas dépasser
son droit; quand le lendemain
elle revint sur son décret et
se contenta de mettre à mort mille
citoyens et de confisquer toutes les
terres, elle se crut humaine et indulgente.
Après la prise de Platée
les hommes furent égorgés, les
femmes vendues, et personne n'accusa
les vainqueurs d'avoir violé le
droit.... C'est en vertu de ce
droit de la guerre que Rome a
étendu la solitude autour d'elle; du
territoire où les Volsques avaient
vingt-trois cités elle a fait les marais
pontins; les cinquante-trois villes
du Latium ont disparu; dans le
Samnium on put longtemps reconnaître
les lieux où les armées romaines
avaient passé, moins aux
vestiges de leurs camps qu'à la
solitude qui règnait aux environs.</q>&mdash;Fustel
de Coulanges, <hi rend='italic'>La Cité
antique</hi>, pp. 263-264.</note> The normal
fate of the captive, which, among barbarians, had been death,
was, in civilised antiquity, slavery; but many thousands
were condemned to the gladiatorial shows, and the vanquished
general was commonly slain in the Mamertine
prison, while his conqueror ascended in triumph to the
Capitol.
</p>

<p>
A few traces of a more humane spirit may, it is true, be
discovered. Plato had advocated the liberation of all Greek
prisoners upon payment of a fixed ransom,<note place='foot'>Plato, <hi rend='italic'>Republic</hi>, lib. v.; Bodin,
<hi rend='italic'>République</hi>, liv. i. cap. 5.</note> and the Spartan
general Callicratidas had nobly acted upon this principle;<note place='foot'>Grote, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Greece</hi>, vol. viii.
p. 224. Agesilaus was also very
humane to captives.&mdash;Ibid. pp.
365-6.</note>
but his example never appears to have been generally followed.
In Rome, the notion of international obligation was
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
very strongly felt. No war was considered just which had
not been officially declared; and even in the case of wars
with barbarians, the Roman historians often discuss the sufficiency
or insufficiency of the motives, with a conscientious
severity a modern historian could hardly surpass.<note place='foot'>This appears continually in
Livy, but most of all, I think, in
the Gaulish historian, Florus.</note> The later
Greek and Latin writings occasionally contain maxims which
exhibit a considerable progress in this sphere. The sole
legitimate object of war, both Cicero and Sallust declared to
be an assured peace. That war, according to Tacitus, ends
well which ends with a pardon. Pliny refused to apply the
epithet great to Cæsar, on account of the torrents of human
blood he had shed. Two Roman conquerors<note place='foot'>Scipio and Trajan.</note> are credited
with the saying that it is better to save the life of one citizen
than to destroy a thousand enemies. Marcus Aurelius mournfully
assimilated the career of a conqueror to that of a simple
robber. Nations or armies which voluntarily submitted to
Rome were habitually treated with great leniency, and
numerous acts of individual magnanimity are recorded. The
violation of the chastity of conquered women by soldiers in
a siege was denounced as a rare and atrocious crime.<note place='foot'>See some very remarkable
passages in Grotius, <hi rend='italic'>De Jure Bell</hi>.
lib. iii. cap. 4, § 19.</note> The
extreme atrocities of ancient war appear at last to have been
practically, though not legally, restricted to two classes.<note place='foot'>These mitigations are fully
enumerated by Ayala, <hi rend='italic'>De Jure et
Officiis Bellicis</hi> (Antwerp, 1597),
Grotius, <hi rend='italic'>De Jure</hi>. It is remarkable
that both Ayala and Grotius base
their attempts to mitigate the
severity of war chiefly upon the
writings and examples of the Pagans.
The limits of the right of conquerors
and the just causes of war are discussed
by Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>De Offic.</hi> lib. i.</note>
Cities where Roman ambassadors had been insulted, or
where some special act of ill faith or cruelty had taken place,
were razed to the ground, and their populations massacred or
delivered into slavery. Barbarian prisoners were regarded
almost as wild beasts, and sent in thousands to fill the slave
market or to combat in the arena.
</p>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<p>
The changes Christianity effected in the rights of war
were very important, and they may, I think, be comprised
under three heads. In the first place, it suppressed the
gladiatorial shows, and thereby saved thousands of captives
from a bloody death. In the next place, it steadily discouraged
the practice of enslaving prisoners, ransomed immense
multitudes with charitable contributions, and by slow and
insensible gradations proceeded on its path of mercy till it
became a recognised principle of international law, that no
Christian prisoners should be reduced to slavery.<note place='foot'>In England the change seems
to have immediately followed conversion.
<q>The evangelical precepts
of peace and love,</q> says a very
learned historian, <q>did not put an
end to war, they did not put an end
to aggressive conquests, but they
distinctly humanised the way in
which war was carried on. From
this time forth the never-ending
wars with the Welsh cease to be
wars of extermination. The
heathen English had been satisfied
with nothing short of the destruction
and expulsion of their enemies;
the Christian English thought it
enough to reduce them to political
subjection.... The Christian
Welsh could now sit down as subjects
of the Christian Saxon. The
Welshman was acknowledged as a
man and a citizen, and was put
under the protection of the law.</q>&mdash;Freeman's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Norman
Conquest</hi>, vol. i. pp. 33-34. Christians
who assisted infidels in wars
were <hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi> excommunicated,
and might therefore be enslaved,
but all others were free from slavery.
<q>Et quidem inter Christianos
laudabili et antiqua consuetudine
introductum est, ut capti
hinc inde, utcunque justo bello, non
fierent servi, sed liberi servarentur
donec solvant precium redemptionis.</q>&mdash;Ayala,
lib. i. cap. 5. <q>This
rule, at least,</q> says Grotius,
<q>(though but a small matter) the
reverence for the Christian law
has enforced, which Socrates vainly
sought to have established among
the Greeks.</q> The Mohammedans
also made it a rule not to enslave
their co-religionists.&mdash;Grotius, <hi rend='italic'>De
Jure</hi>, iii. 7, § 9. Pagan and barbarian
prisoners were, however,
sold as slaves (especially by the
Spaniards) till very recently.</note> In the
third place, it had a more indirect but very powerful influence
by the creation of a new warlike ideal. The ideal
knight of the Crusades and of chivalry, uniting all the force
and fire of the ancient warrior, with something of the tenderness
and humility of the Christian saint, sprang from the
conjunction of the two streams of religious and of military
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
feeling; and although this ideal, like all others, was a creation
of the imagination not often perfectly realised in
life, yet it remained the type and model of warlike excellence,
to which many generations aspired; and its softening
influence may even now be largely traced in the character of
the modern gentleman.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule: 50%'/>

<p>
Together with the gradual fusion of the military spirit
with Christianity, we may dimly descry, in the period before
Charlemagne, the first stages of that consecration of secular
rank which at a later period, in the forms of chivalry, the
divine right of kings, and the reverence for aristocracies,
played so large a part both in moral and in political history.
</p>

<p>
We have already seen that the course of events in the
Roman Empire had been towards the continual aggrandisement
of the imperial power. The representative despotism
of Augustus was at last succeeded by the oriental despotism
of Diocletian. The senate sank into a powerless assembly of
imperial nominees, and the spirit of Roman freedom wholly
perished with the extinction of Stoicism.
</p>

<p>
It would probably be a needless refinement to seek any
deeper causes for this change than may be found in the ordinary
principles of human nature. Despotism is the normal
and legitimate government of an early society in which
knowledge has not yet developed the powers of the people;
but when it is introduced into a civilised community, it is of
the nature of a disease, and a disease which, unless it be
checked, has a continual tendency to spread. When free
nations abdicate their political functions, they gradually lose
both the capacity and the desire for freedom. Political talent
and ambition, having no sphere for action, steadily decay,
and servile, enervating, and vicious habits proportionately
increase. Nations are organic beings in a constant process
of expansion or decay, and where they do not exhibit a progress
of liberty they usually exhibit a progress of servitude.
</p>

<p>
It can hardly be asserted that Christianity had much influence
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
upon this change. By accelerating in some degree
that withdrawal of the virtuous energies of the people from
the sphere of government which had long been in process, it
prevented the great improvement of morals, which it undoubtedly
effected, from appearing perceptibly in public
affairs. It taught a doctrine of passive obedience, which its
disciples nobly observed in the worst periods of persecution.
On the other hand, the Christians emphatically repudiated
the ascription of Divine honours to the sovereign, and they
asserted with heroic constancy their independent worship, in
defiance of the law. After the time of Constantine, however,
their zeal became far less pure, and sectarian interests wholly
governed their principles. Much misapplied learning has
been employed in endeavouring to extract from the Fathers
a consistent doctrine concerning the relations of subjects
to their sovereigns; but every impartial observer may
discover that the principle upon which they acted was exceedingly
simple. When a sovereign was sufficiently orthodox
in his opinions, and sufficiently zealous in patronising
the Church and in persecuting the heretics, he was extolled
as an angel. When his policy was opposed to the Church,
he was represented as a dæmon. The estimate which Gregory
of Tours has given of the character of Clovis, though far
more frank, is not a more striking instance of moral perversion
than the fulsome and indeed blasphemous adulation
which Eusebius poured upon Constantine&mdash;a sovereign whose
character was at all times of the most mingled description,
and who, shortly after his conversion, put to a violent death
his son, his nephew, and his wife. If we were to estimate
the attitude of ecclesiastics to sovereigns by the language of
Eusebius, we should suppose that they ascribed to them a
direct Divine inspiration, and exalted the Imperial dignity
to an extent that was before unknown.<note place='foot'>The character of Constantine,
and the estimate of it in Eusebius,
are well treated by Dean Stanley,
<hi rend='italic'>Lectures on the Eastern Church</hi>
(Lect. vi.).</note> But when Julian
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
mounted the throne, the whole aspect of the Church was
changed. This great and virtuous, though misguided sovereign,
whose private life was a model of purity, who carried
to the throne the manners, tastes, and friendships of a philosophic
life, and who proclaimed and, with very slight exceptions,
acted with the largest and most generous toleration,
was an enemy of the Church, and all the vocabulary of invective
was in consequence habitually lavished upon him.
Ecclesiastics and laymen combined in insulting him, and
when, after a brief but glorious reign of less than two years,
he met an honourable death on the battle-field, neither the
disaster that had befallen the Roman arms, nor the present
dangers of the army, nor the heroic courage which the fallen
emperor had displayed, nor the majestic tranquillity of his
end, nor the tears of his faithful friends, could shame the
Christian community into the decency of silence. A peal of
brutal merriment filled the land. In Antioch the Christians
assembled in the theatres and in the churches, to celebrate
with rejoicing the death which their emperor had met in
fighting against the enemies of his country.<note place='foot'>Theodoret, iii. 28.</note> A crowd of
vindictive legends expressed the exultation of the Church,<note place='foot'>They are collected by Chateaubriand,
<hi rend='italic'>Études hist.</hi> 2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> disc.
2<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>me</hi> partie.</note>
and St. Gregory Nazianzen devoted his eloquence to immortalising
it. His brother had at one time been a high official
in the Empire, and had fearlessly owned his Christianity
under Julian; but that emperor not only did not remove
him from his post, but even honoured him with his warm
friendship.<note place='foot'>See St. Gregory's oration on
<hi rend='italic'>Cesarius</hi>.</note> The body of Julian had been laid but a short
time in the grave, when St. Gregory delivered two fierce
invectives against his memory, collected the grotesque
calumnies that had been heaped upon his character, expressed
a regret that his remains had not been flung after
death into the common sewer, and regaled the hearers by an
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
emphatic assertion of the tortures that were awaiting him in
hell. Among the Pagans a charge of the gravest kind was
brought against the Christians. It was said that Julian died
by the spear, not of an enemy, but of one of his own Christian
soldiers. When we remember that he was at once an emperor
and a general, that he fell when bravely and confidently
leading his army in the field, and in the critical moment of a
battle on which the fortunes of the Empire largely depended,
this charge, which Libanius has made, appears to involve as
large an amount of base treachery as any that can be conceived.
It was probably a perfectly groundless calumny;
but the manner in which it was regarded among the
Christians is singularly characteristic. <q>Libanius,</q> says
one of the ecclesiastical historians, <q>clearly states that
the emperor fell by the hand of a Christian; and this, probably,
was the truth. It is not unlikely that some of the
soldiers who then served in the Roman army might have
conceived the idea of acting like the ancient slayers of
tyrants who exposed themselves to death in the cause of
liberty, and fought in defence of their country, their families,
and their friends, and whose names are held in universal
admiration. Still less is he deserving of blame who, for the
sake of God and of religion, performed so bold a deed.</q><note place='foot'>Sozomen, vi. 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
It may be asserted, I think, without exaggeration, that
the complete subordination of all other principles to their
theological interests, which characterised the ecclesiastics
under Julian, continued for many centuries. No language
of invective was too extreme to be applied to a sovereign
who opposed their interests. No language of adulation was too
extravagant for a sovereign who sustained them. Of all the
emperors who disgraced the throne of Constantinople, the
most odious and ferocious was probably Phocas. An obscure
centurion, he rose by a military revolt to the supreme power,
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
and the Emperor Maurice, with his family, fell into his hands.
He resolved to put the captive emperor to death; but, first of
all, he ordered his five children to be brought out and to
be successively murdered before the eyes of their father, who
bore the awful sight with a fine mixture of antique heroism
and of Christian piety, murmuring, as each child fell beneath
the knife of the assassin, <q>Thou art just, O Lord, and
righteous are Thy judgments,</q> and even interposing, at the
last moment, to reveal the heroic fraud of the nurse who
desired to save his youngest child by substituting for it her
own. But Maurice&mdash;who had been a weak and avaricious
rather than a vicious sovereign&mdash;had shown himself jealous
of the influence of the Pope, had forbidden the soldiers,
during the extreme danger of their country, deserting their
colours to enrol themselves as monks, and had even encouraged
the pretensions of the Archbishop of Constantinople to
the title of Universal Bishop; and, in the eyes of the Roman
priests, the recollection of these crimes was sufficient to
excuse the most brutal of murders. In two letters, full of
passages from Scripture, and replete with fulsome and
blasphemous flattery, the Pope, St. Gregory the Great, wrote
to congratulate Phocas and his wife upon their triumph; he
called heaven and earth to rejoice over them; he placed their
images to be venerated in the Lateran, and he adroitly insinuated
that it was impossible that, with their well-known piety,
they could fail to be very favourable to the See of Peter.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xiii. 31-39. In the second
of these letters (which is addressed
to Leontia), he says: <q>Rogare forsitan
debui ut ecclesiam beati
Petri apostoli quæ nunc usque
gravibus insidiis laboravit, haberet
Vestra Tranquillitas specialiter
commendatam. Sed qui scio quia
omnipotentem Deum diligitis, non
debeo petere quod sponte ex benignitate
vestræ pietatis exhibetis.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
The course of events in relation to the monarchical power
was for some time different in the East and the West.
Constantine had himself assumed more of the pomp and
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
manner of an oriental sovereign than any preceding emperor,
and the court of Constantinople was soon characterised by an
extravagance of magnificence on the part of the monarch, and
of adulation on the part of the subjects, which has probably
never been exceeded.<note place='foot'>See the graphic description in Gibbon, ch. liii.</note> The imperial power in the East
overshadowed the ecclesiastical, and the priests, notwithstanding
their fierce outbreak during the iconoclastic
controversy, and a few minor paroxysms of revolt, gradually
sank into that contented subservience which has usually
characterised the Eastern Church. In the West, however,
the Roman bishops were in a great degree independent of the
sovereigns, and in some degree opposed to their interests.
The transfer of the imperial power to Constantinople, by
leaving the Roman bishops the chief personages in a city
which long association as well as actual power rendered the
foremost in the world, was one of the great causes of the
aggrandisement of the Papacy and the Arianism of many
sovereigns, the jealousy which others exhibited of ecclesiastical
encroachments, and the lukewarmness of a few in
persecuting heretics, were all causes of dissension. On the
severance of the Empire, the Western Church came in contact
with rulers of another type. The barbarian kings were
little more than military chiefs, elected for the most part by
the people, surrounded by little or no special sanctity, and
maintaining their precarious and very restricted authority by
their courage or their skill. A few feebly imitated the pomp
of the Roman emperors, but their claims had no great
weight with the world. The aureole which the genius of
Theodoric cast around his throne passed away upon his death,
and the Arianism of that great sovereign sufficiently debarred
him from the sympathies of the Church. In Gaul, under a
few bold and unscrupulous men, the Merovingian dynasty
emerged from a host of petty kings, and consolidated the
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
whole country into one kingdom; but after a short period it
degenerated, the kings became mere puppets in the hands of
the mayors of the palace, and these latter, whose office
had become hereditary, who were the chiefs of the great
landed proprietors, and who had acquired by their position
a personal ascendancy over the sovereigns, became the
virtual rulers of the nation.
</p>

<p>
It was out of these somewhat unpromising conditions
that the mediæval doctrine of the Divine right of kings, and
the general reverence for rank, that formed the essence of
chivalry, were slowly evolved. Political and moral causes
conspired in producing them. The chief political causes&mdash;which
are well known&mdash;may be summed up in a few words.
</p>

<p>
When Leo the Isaurian attempted, in the eighth century,
to repress the worship of images, the resistance which he met
at Constantinople, though violent, was speedily allayed; but
the Pope, assuming a far higher position than any Byzantine
ecclesiastic could attain, boldly excommunicated the emperor,
and led a revolt against his authority, which resulted in the
virtual independence of Italy. His position was at this time
singularly grand. He represented a religious cause to which
the great mass of the Christian world were passionately
attached. He was venerated as the emancipator of Italy.
He exhibited in the hour of his triumph a moderation
which conciliated many enemies, and prevented the anarchy
that might naturally have been expected. He presided, at
the same time, over a vast monastic organisation, which
ramified over all Christendom, propagated his authority
among many barbarous nations, and, by its special attachment
to the Papacy, as distinguished from the Episcopacy, contributed
very much to transform Christianity into a spiritual
despotism. One great danger, however, still menaced his
power. The barbarous Lombards were continually invading
his territory, and threatening the independence of Rome.
The Lombard monarch, Luitprand had quailed in the very
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
hour of his triumph before the menace of eternal torture
but his successor, Astolphus, was proof against every fear,
and it seemed as though the Papal city must have inevitably
succumbed before his arms.
</p>

<p>
In their complete military impotence, the Popes looked
abroad for some foreign succour, and they naturally turned
to the Franks, whose martial tastes and triumphs were
universally renowned. Charles Martel, though simply a
mayor of the palace, had saved Europe from the Mohammedans,
and the Pope expected that he would unsheath his
sword for the defence of the Vatican. Charles, however, was
deaf to all entreaties; and, although he had done more than
any ruler since Constantine for the Church, his attention
seems to have been engrossed by the interests of his own
country, and he was much alienated from the sympathies of
the clergy. An ancient legend tells how a saint saw his soul
carried by dæmons into hell, because he had secularised
Church property, and a more modern historian<note place='foot'>Baronius.</note> has ascribed
his death to his having hesitated to defend the Pope. His
son, Pepin, however, actuated probably in different degrees
by personal ambition, a desire for military adventure, and
religious zeal, listened readily to the prayer of the Pope, and
a compact was entered into between the parties, which proved
one of the most important events in history. Pepin agreed
to secure the Pope from the danger by which he was
threatened. The Pope agreed to give his religious sanction
to the ambition of Pepin, who designed to depose the
Merovingian dynasty, and to become in name, as he was
already in fact, the sovereign of Gaul.
</p>

<p>
It is not necessary for me to recount at length the details
of these negotiations, which are described by many historians.
It is sufficient to say, that the compact was religiously
observed. Pepin made two expeditions to Italy, and completely
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
shattered the power of the Lombards, wresting from
them the rich exarchate of Ravenna, which he ceded to the
Pope, who still retained his nominal allegiance to the
Byzantine emperor, but who became, by this donation, for
the first time avowedly an independent temporal prince.
On the other hand, the deposition of Childeric was peaceably
effected; the last of the Merovingians was immured in a
monastery, and the Carlovingian dynasty ascended the throne
under the special benediction of the Pope, who performed on
the occasion the ceremony of consecration, which had not
previously been in general use,<note place='foot'>Mably, ii. 1; Gibbon, ch. xlix.</note> placed the crown with his
own hands on the head of Pepin, and delivered a solemn
anathema against all who should rebel against the new king
or against his successors.
</p>

<p>
The extreme importance of these events was probably not
fully realised by any of the parties concerned in them. It
was evident, indeed, that the Pope had been freed from a
pressing danger, and had acquired a great accession of
temporal power, and also that a new dynasty had arisen in
Gaul under circumstances that were singularly favourable
and imposing. But, much more important than these facts
was the permanent consecration of the royal authority that
had been effected. The Pope had successfully asserted his
power of deposing and elevating kings, and had thus acquired
a position which influenced the whole subsequent course of
European history. The monarch, if he had become in some
degree subservient to the priest, had become in a great
degree independent of his people; the Divine origin of his
power was regarded as a dogma of religion, and a sanctity
surrounded him which immeasurably aggrandised his power.
The ascription, by the Pagans, of divinity to kings had had
no appreciable effect in increasing their authority or restraining
the limits of criticism or of rebellion. The ascription of
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
a Divine right to kings, independent of the wishes of the
people, has been one of the most enduring and most potent of
superstitions, and it has even now not wholly vanished from
the world.<note place='foot'>There are some good remarks
upon the way in which, among the
free Franks, the bishops taught the
duty of passive obedience, in
Mably, <hi rend='italic'>Obs. sur l'Histoire de
France</hi>, livre i. ch. iii. Gregory of
Tours, in his address to Chilperic,
had said: <q>If any of us, O king,
transgress the boundaries of justice,
thou art at hand to correct
us; but if thou shouldest exceed
them, who is to condemn thee?
We address thee, and if it please
thee thou listenest to us; but if it
please thee not, who is to condemn
thee save He who has proclaimed
Himself Justice.</q>&mdash;Greg. Tur.
v. 19. On the other hand,
Hincmar, Archbishop of Rheims,
strongly asserted the obligation of
kings to observe the law, and denounced
as diabolical the doctrine
that they are subject to none but
God. (Allen, <hi rend='italic'>On the Royal Prerogative</hi>
(1849), pp. 171-172.)</note>
</p>

<p>
Mere isolated political events have, however, rarely or
never this profound influence, unless they have been preceded
and prepared by other agencies. The first predisposing
cause of the ready reception of the doctrine of the Divine
character of authority, may probably be found in the prominence
of the monastic system. I have already observed
that this system represents in its extreme form that exaltation
of the virtues of humility and of obedience which
so broadly distinguishes the Christian from the Pagan type
of excellence. I have also noticed that, owing to the concurrence
of many causes, it had acquired such dimensions
and influence as to supply the guiding ideal of the Christian
world. Controlling or monopolising all education and
literature, furnishing most of the legislators and many of the
statesmen of the age, attracting to themselves all moral
enthusiasm and most intellectual ability, the monks soon left
their impress on the character of nations. Habits of
obedience and dispositions of humility were diffused, revered,
and idealised, and a Church which rested mainly on tradition
fostered a deep sense of the sanctity of antiquity, and a
natural disposition to observe traditional customs. In this
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
manner a tone of feeling was gradually formed that assimilated
with the monarchical and aristocratical institutions of
feudalism, which flourished chiefly because they corresponded
with the moral feelings of the time.
</p>

<p>
In the next place, a series of social and political causes
diminished the personal independence for which the barbarians
had been noted. The king had at first been, not the
sovereign of a country, but the chief of a tribe.<note place='foot'>The exact degree of the authority
of the barbarian kings, and the
different stages by which their
power was increased, are matters
of great controversy. The reader
may consult Thierry's <hi rend='italic'>Lettres sur
l'Hist. de France</hi> (let. 9); Guizot's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Civilisation</hi>; Mably,
<hi rend='italic'>Observ. sur l'Hist. de France</hi>; Freeman's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Norman Conquest</hi>,
vol. i.</note> Gradually,
however, with more settled habits, the sovereignty assumed a
territorial character, and we may soon discover the rudiments
of a territorial aristocracy. The kings gave their leading
chiefs portions of conquered land or of the royal domains,
under the name of benefices. The obligation of military
service was attached to these benefices, and by slow and
perhaps insensible stages, each of which has been the subject
of fierce controversy, they were made irrevocable, and
ultimately hereditary. While society was still disorganised,
small landlords purchased the protection of the Church, or of
some important chief, by surrendering their estates, which
they received back as tenants, subject to the condition of the
payment of rent, or of military service. Others, without
making such surrender, placed themselves under the care of
a neighbouring lord, and offered, in return, homage or military
aid. At the same time, through causes to which I have
already adverted, the free peasants for the most part sank
into serfs, subject to and protected by the landowners. In
this manner a hierarchy of ranks was gradually formed, of
which the sovereign was the apex and the serf the basis.
The complete legal organisation of this hierarchy belongs to
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
the period of feudalism, which is not within the scope of the
present volume; but the chief elements of feudalism existed
before Charlemagne, and the moral results flowing from them
may be already discerned. Each rank, except the very
highest, was continually brought into contact with a superior,
and a feeling of constant dependence and subordination was
accordingly fostered. To the serf, who depended for all
things upon the neighbouring noble, to the noble, who held
all his dignities on the condition of frequent military service
under his sovereign, the idea of secular rank became indissolubly
connected with that of supreme greatness.
</p>

<p>
It will appear evident, from the foregoing observations,
that in the period before Charlemagne the moral and political
causes were already in action, which at a much later
period produced the organisation of chivalry&mdash;an organisation
which was founded on the combination and the glorification
of secular rank and military prowess. But, in order
that the tendencies I have described should acquire their full
force, it was necessary that they should be represented or
illustrated in some great personage, who, by the splendour
and the beauty of his career, could fascinate the imaginations
of men. It is much easier to govern great masses of men
through their imagination than through their reason. Moral
principles rarely act powerfully upon the world, except by
way of example or ideals. When the course of events has
been to glorify the ascetic or monarchical or military spirit, a
great saint, or sovereign, or soldier will arise, who will concentrate
in one dazzling focus the blind tendencies of his
time, kindle the enthusiasm and fascinate the imagination of
the people. But for the prevailing tendency, the great man
would not have arisen, or would not have exercised his great
influence. But for the great man, whose career appealed
vividly to the imagination, the prevailing tendency would
never have acquired its full intensity.
</p>

<p>
This typical figure appeared in Charlemagne, whose
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
colossal form towers with a majestic grandeur both in history
and in romance. Of all the great rulers of men, there has
probably been no other who was so truly many-sided, whose
influence pervaded so completely all the religious, intellectual,
and political modes of thought existing in his time. Rising
in one of the darkest periods of European history, this great
emperor resuscitated, with a brief but dazzling splendour, the
faded glories of the Empire of the West, conducted, for the
most part in person, numerous expeditions against the barbarous
nations around him, promulgated a vast system of
legislation, reformed the discipline of every order of the
Church, and reduced all classes of the clergy to subservience
to his will, while, by legalising tithes, he greatly increased
their material prosperity. He at the same time contributed,
in a measure, to check the intellectual decadence by founding
schools and libraries, and drawing around him all the scattered
learning of Europe. He reformed the coinage, extended
commerce, influenced religious controversies, and convoked
great legislative assemblies, which ultimately contributed
largely to the organisation of feudalism. In all these
spheres the traces of his vast, organising, and far-seeing
genius may be detected, and the influence which he exercised
over the imaginations of men is shown by the numerous
legends of which he is the hero. In the preceding ages the
supreme ideal had been the ascetic. When the popular
imagination embodied in legends its conception of humanity
in its noblest and most attractive form, it instinctively
painted some hermit-saint of many penances and many
miracles. In the Romances of Charlemagne and of Arthur
we may trace the dawning of a new type of greatness. The
hero of the imagination of Europe was no longer a hermit,
but a king, a warrior, a knight. The long train of influences
I have reviewed, culminating in Charlemagne, had done
their work. The age of the ascetics began to fade. The age
of the crusades and of chivalry succeeded it.
</p>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<p>
It is curious to observe the manner in which, under the
influence of the prevailing tendency, the career of Charlemagne
was transfigured by the popular imagination. His
military enterprises had been chiefly directed against the
Saxons, against whom he had made not less than thirty-two
expeditions. With the Mohammedans he had but little
contact. It was Charles Martel, not his grandson, who, by
the great battle of Poitiers, had checked their career. Charlemagne
made, in person, but a single expedition against them
in Spain, and that expedition was on a small scale, and was
disastrous in its issue. But in the Carlovingian romances,
which arose at a time when the enthusiasm of the Crusades
was permeating Christendom, events were represented in a
wholly different light. Charles Martel has no place among
the ideal combatants of the Church. He had appeared too
early, his figure was not sufficiently great to fascinate the
popular imagination, and by confiscating ecclesiastical property,
and refusing to assist the Pope against the Lombards,
he had fallen under the ban of the clergy. Charlemagne, on
the other hand, was represented as the first and greatest of
the crusaders. His wars with the Saxons were scarcely
noticed. His whole life was said to have been spent in
heroic and triumphant combats with the followers of
Mohammed.<note place='foot'>Fauriel, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de la Poésie
provençale</hi>, tome ii. p. 252.</note> Among the achievements attributed to him was
an expedition to rescue Nismes and Carcassonne from their
grasp, which was, in fact, a dim tradition of the victories of
Charles Martel.<note place='foot'>Ibid, p. 258.</note> He is even said to have carried his victorious
arms into the heart of Palestine, and he is the hero
of what are probably the three earliest extant romances of
the Crusades.<note place='foot'>Le Grand D'Aussy, <hi rend='italic'>Fabliaux</hi>,
préf. p. xxiv. These romances
were accounts of his expeditions to
Spain, to Languedoc, and to Palestine.</note> In fiction, as in history, his reign forms the
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
great landmark separating the early period of the middle
ages from the age of military Christianity.
</p>

<p>
On the verge of this great change I draw this history to
a close. In pursuing our long and chequered course, from
Augustus to Charlemagne, we have seen the rise and fall of
many types of character, and of many forms of enthusiasm.
We have seen the influence of universal empire expanding,
and the influence of Greek civilisation intensifying, the
sympathies of Europe. We have surveyed the successive
progress of Stoicism, Platonism, and Egyptian philosophies,
at once reflecting and guiding the moral tendencies of society.
We have traced the course of progress or retrogression in
many fields of social, political, and legislative life, have
watched the cradle of European Christianity, examined the
causes of its triumph, the difficulties it encountered, and the
priceless blessings its philanthropic spirit bestowed upon
mankind. We have also pursued step by step the mournful
history of its corruption, its asceticism, and its intolerance,
the various transformations it produced or underwent when
the turbid waters of the barbarian invasions had inundated
the civilisations of Europe. It remains for me, before concluding
this work, to investigate one class of subjects to
which I have, as yet, but briefly adverted&mdash;to examine the
effects of the changes I have described upon the character
and position of woman, and upon the grave moral questions
concerning the relations of the sexes.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Position Of Women.</head>

<p>
In the long series of moral revolutions that have been
described in the foregoing chapters, I have more than once
had occasion to refer to the position that was assigned to
woman in the community, and to the virtues and vices that
spring directly from the relations of the sexes. I have not,
however, as yet discussed these questions with a fulness at
all corresponding to their historical importance, and I propose,
in consequence, before concluding this volume, to devote
a few pages to their examination. Of all the many questions
that are treated in this work, there is none which I approach
with so much hesitation, for there is probably none which it
is so difficult to treat with clearness and impartiality, and at
the same time without exciting any scandal or offence.
The complexity of the problem, arising from the very large
place which exceptional institutions or circumstances, and
especially the influence of climate and race, have had on the
chastity of nations, I have already noticed, and the extreme
delicacy of the matters with which this branch of ethics
is connected must be palpable to all. The first duty of an
historian, however, is to truth; and it is absolutely impossible
to present a true picture of the moral condition of different
ages, and to form a true estimate of the moral effects of
different religions, without adverting to the department of
morals, which has exhibited most change, and has probably
exercised most influence.
</p>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<p>
It is natural that, in the period when men are still perfect
barbarians, when their habits of life are still nomadic, and
when, war and the chase, being their sole pursuits, the
qualities that are required in these form their chief measure
of excellence, the inferiority of women to men should be
regarded as undoubted, and their position should be extremely
degraded. In all those qualities which are then most prized,
women are indisputably inferior. The social qualities in
which they are especially fitted to excel have no sphere for
their display. The ascendancy of beauty is very faint, and,
even if it were otherwise, few traces of female beauty could
survive the hardships of the savage life. Woman is looked
upon merely as the slave of man, and as the minister to
his passions. In the first capacity, her life is one of continual,
abject, and unrequited toil. In the second capacity, she is
exposed to all the violent revulsions of feeling that follow,
among rude men, the gratification of the animal passions.
</p>

<p>
Even in this early stage, however, we may trace some
rudiments of those moral sentiments which are destined at a
later period to expand. The institution of marriage exists.
The value of chastity is commonly in some degree felt, and
appears in the indignation which is displayed against the
adulterer. The duty of restraining the passions is largely
recognised in the female, though the males are only restricted
by the prohibition of adultery.
</p>

<p>
The first two steps which are taken towards the elevation
of woman are probably the abandonment of the custom of
purchasing wives, and the construction of the family on the
basis of monogamy. In the earliest periods of civilisation, the
marriage contract was arranged between the bridegroom and
the father of the bride, on the condition of a sum of money
being paid by the former to the latter. This sum, which
is known in the laws of the barbarians as the <q>mundium,</q><note place='foot'>The ἕδνα of the Greeks.</note>
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
was in fact a payment to the father for the cession of his
daughter, who thus became the bought slave of her husband.
It is one of the most remarkable features of the ancient laws
of India, that they forbade this gift, on the ground that the
parent should not sell his child;<note place='foot'>Legouvé, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire morale des
Femmes</hi>, pp. 95-96.</note> but there can be little
doubt that this sale was at one time the ordinary type of
marriage. In the Jewish writings we find Jacob purchasing
Leah and Rachel by certain services to their father; and
this custom, which seems to have been at one time
general in Judea,<note place='foot'>Gen. xxix., xxxiv. 12; Deut.
xxii. 29; 1 Sam. xviii. 25.</note> appears in the age of Homer to have
been general in Greece. At an early period, however, of
Greek history, the purchase-money was replaced by the
dowry, or sum of money paid by the father of the bride for
the use of his daughter;<note place='foot'>The history of dowries is
briefly noticed by Grote, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of
Greece</hi>, vol. ii. pp. 112-113; and
more fully by Lord Kames, in the
admirable chapter <q>On the Progress
of the Female Sex,</q> in his
<hi rend='italic'>Sketches of the History of Man</hi>, a
book less read than it deserves to
be. M. Legouvé has also devoted
a chapter to it in his <hi rend='italic'>Hist. morale
des Femmes</hi>. See, too, Legendre,
<hi rend='italic'>Traité de l'Opinion</hi>, tome ii. pp.
329-330. We find traces of the
dowry, as well as of the ἕδνα, in
Homer. Penelope had received a
dowry from Icarus, her father.
M. Michelet, in one of those fanciful
books which he has recently
published, maintains a view of the
object of the ἕδνα which I do not
remember to have seen elsewhere,
and which I do not believe. He
says: <q>Ce prix n'est point un achat
de la femme, mais une indemnité
qui dédommage la famille du père
pour les enfants futurs, qui ne
profiteront pas à cette famille mais
à celle où la femme va entrer.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>La
Femme</hi>, p. 166.</note> and this, although it passed into the
hands of the husband, contributed to elevate the wife, in the
first place, by the dignity it gave her, and, in the next place,
by special laws, which both in Greece and Rome secured it
to her in most cases of separation.<note place='foot'>In Rome, when the separation
was due to the misconduct of the
wife, the dowry belonged to her
husband.</note> The wife thus possessed
a guarantee against ill-usage by her husband. She ceased to
be his slave, and became in some degree a contracting party.
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
Among the early Germans, a different and very remarkable
custom existed. The bride did not bring any dowry to her
husband, nor did the bridegroom give anything to the father
of the bride; but he gave his gift to the bride herself, on the
morning after the first night of marriage, and this, which
was called the <q>Morgengab,</q> or morning gift, was the origin
of the jointure.<note place='foot'><q>Dotem non uxor marito sed
uxori maritus offert.</q>&mdash;Tac. <hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi>
xviii. On the Morgengab, see
Canciani, <hi rend='italic'>Leges Barbarorum</hi> (Venetiis,
1781), vol. i. pp. 102-104;
ii. pp. 230-231. Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antich.
Ital.</hi> diss. xx. Luitprand enacted
that no Longobard should give
more than one-fourth of his substance
as a Morgengab. In Gregory
of Tours (ix. 20) we have an
example of the gift of some cities
as a Morgengab.</note>
</p>

<p>
Still more important than the foregoing was the institution
of monogamy, by which, from its earliest days, the Greek
civilisation proclaimed its superiority to the Asiatic civilisations
that had preceded it. We may regard monogamy
either in the light of our intuitive moral sentiment on the
subject of purity, or in the light of the interests of society.
In its Oriental or polygamous stage, marriage is regarded
almost exclusively, in its lowest aspect, as a gratification of
the passions; while in European marriages the mutual
attachment and respect of the contracting parties, the formation
of a household, and the long train of domestic feelings
and duties that accompany it, have all their distinguished
place among the motives of the contract, and the lower
element has comparatively little prominence. In this way it
may be intelligibly said, without any reference to utilitarian
considerations, that monogamy is a higher state than polygamy.
The utilitarian arguments in its defence are also
extremely powerful, and may be summed up in three
sentences. Nature, by making the number of males and
females nearly equal, indicates it as natural. In no other
form of marriage can the government of the family, which is
one of the chief ends of marriage, be so happily sustained,
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
and in no other does woman assume the position of the equal
of man.
</p>

<p>
Monogamy was the general system in Greece, though
there are said to have been slight and temporary deviations
into the earlier system, after some great disasters, when an
increase of population was ardently desired.<note place='foot'>See, on this point, Aul. Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>Noct. Att.</hi> xv. 20. Euripides is
said to have had two wives.</note> A broad line
must, however, be drawn between the legendary or poetical
period, as reflected in Homer and perpetuated in the tragedians,
and the later historical period. It is one of the
most remarkable, and to some writers one of the most
perplexing, facts in the moral history of Greece, that in the
former and ruder period women had undoubtedly the highest
place, and their type exhibited the highest perfection. Moral
ideas, in a thousand forms, have been sublimated, enlarged,
and changed, by advancing civilisation; but it may be
fearlessly asserted that the types of female excellence which
are contained in the Greek poems, while they are among the
earliest, are also among the most perfect in the literature of
mankind. The conjugal tenderness of Hector and Andromache;
the unwearied fidelity of Penelope, awaiting through
the long revolving years the return of her storm-tossed
husband, who looked forward to her as to the crown of all
his labours; the heroic love of Alcestis, voluntarily dying
that her husband might live; the filial piety of Antigone;
the majestic grandeur of the death of Polyxena; the more
subdued and saintly resignation of Iphigenia, excusing with
her last breath the father who had condemned her; the
joyous, modest, and loving Nausicaa, whose figure shines like
a perfect idyll among the tragedies of the Odyssey&mdash;all these
are pictures of perennial beauty, which Rome and Christendom,
chivalry and modern civilisation, have neither eclipsed
nor transcended. Virgin modesty and conjugal fidelity, the
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
graces as well as the virtues of the most perfect womanhood,
have never been more exquisitely pourtrayed. The female
figures stand out in the canvas almost as prominently as the
male ones, and are surrounded by an almost equal reverence.
The whole history of the Siege of Troy is a history of the
catastrophes that followed a violation of the nuptial tie.
Yet, at the same time, the position of women was in some
respects a degraded one. The custom of purchase-money
given to the father of the bride was general. The husbands
appear to have indulged largely, and with little or no censure,
in concubines.<note place='foot'>Aristotle said that Homer
never gives a concubine to Menelaus,
in order to intimate his
respect for Helen&mdash;though false.
(<hi rend='italic'>Athenæus</hi>, xiii. 3.)</note> Female captives of the highest rank were
treated with great harshness. The inferiority of women to
men was strongly asserted, and it was illustrated and defended
by a very curious physiological notion, that the
generative power belonged exclusively to men, women having
only a very subordinate part in the production of their
children.<note place='foot'>Æschylus has put this curious
notion into the mouth of Apollo,
in a speech in the <hi rend='italic'>Eumenides</hi>. It
has, however, been very widely
diffused, and may be found in
Indian, Greek, Roman, and even
Christian writers. M. Legouvé,
who has devoted a very curious
chapter to the subject, quotes a
passage from St. Thomas Aquinas,
accepting it, and arguing from it,
that a father should be more loved
than a mother. M. Legouvé says
that when the male of one animal
and the female of another are
crossed, the type of the female
usually predominates in the offspring.
See Legouvé, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. morale
des Femmes</hi>, pp. 216-228; Fustel
de Coulanges, <hi rend='italic'>La Cité antique</hi>, pp.
39-40; and also a curious note by
Boswell, in Croker's edition of
Boswell's <hi rend='italic'>Life of Johnson</hi> (1847),
p. 472.</note> The woman Pandora was said to have been the
author of all human ills.
</p>

<p>
In the historical age of Greece, the legal position of
women had in some respects slightly improved, but their
moral condition had undergone a marked deterioration.
Virtuous women lived a life of perfect seclusion. The foremost
and most dazzling type of Ionic womanhood was the
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
courtesan, while, among the men, the latitude accorded by
public opinion was almost unrestricted.
</p>

<p>
The facts in moral history, which it is at once most
important and most difficult to appreciate, are what may be
called the facts of feeling. It is much easier to show what
men did or taught than to realise the state of mind that rendered
possible such actions or teaching; and in the case before
us we have to deal with a condition of feeling so extremely
remote from that of our own day, that the difficulty is preeminently
great. Very sensual, and at the same time very
brilliant societies, have indeed repeatedly existed, and the
histories of both France and Italy afford many examples of
an artistic and intellectual enthusiasm encircling those who
were morally most frail; but the peculiarity of Greek sensuality
is, that it grew up, for the most part, uncensured,
and indeed even encouraged, under the eyes of some of the
most illustrious of moralists. If we can imagine Ninon de
l'Enclos at a time when the rank and splendour of Parisian
society thronged her drawing-rooms, reckoning a Bossuet
or a Fénelon among her followers&mdash;if we can imagine these
prelates publicly advising her about the duties of her profession,
and the means of attaching the affections of her
lovers&mdash;we shall have conceived a relation scarcely more
strange than that which existed between Socrates and the
courtesan Theodota.
</p>

<p>
In order to reconstruct, as far as possible, the modes of
feeling of the Greek moralists, it will be necessary in the
first place to say a few words concerning one of the most
delicate, but at the same time most important, problems
with which the legislator and the moralist have to deal.
</p>

<p>
It was a favourite doctrine of the Christian Fathers, that
concupiscence, or the sensual passion, was <q>the original sin</q>
of human nature; and it must be owned that the progress of
knowledge, which is usually extremely opposed to the ascetic
theory of life, concurs with the theological view, in showing
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
the natural force of this appetite to be far greater than the
well-being of man requires. The writings of Malthus have
proved, what the Greek moralists appear in a considerable
degree to have seen, that its normal and temperate exercise
in the form of marriage, would produce, if universal, the
utmost calamities to the world, and that, while nature seems
in the most unequivocal manner to urge the human race to
early marriages, the first condition of an advancing civilisation
in populous countries is to restrain or diminish them.
In no highly civilised society is marriage general on the first
development of the passions, and the continual tendency of
increasing knowledge is to render such marriages more rare.
It is also an undoubted truth that, however much moralists
may enforce the obligation of extra-matrimonial purity, this
obligation has never been even approximately regarded; and
in all nations, ages, and religions a vast mass of irregular
indulgence has appeared, which has probably contributed
more than any other single cause to the misery and the degradation
of man.
</p>

<p>
There are two ends which a moralist, in dealing with this
question, will especially regard&mdash;the natural duty of every
man doing something for the support of the child he has
called into existence, and the preservation of the domestic
circle unassailed and unpolluted. The family is the centre
and the archetype of the State, and the happiness and goodness
of society are always in a very great degree dependent
upon the purity of domestic life. The essentially exclusive
nature of marital affection, and the natural desire of every
man to be certain of the paternity of the child he supports,
render the incursions of irregular passions within the domestic
circle a cause of extreme suffering. Yet it would appear as
if the excessive force of these passions would render such
incursions both frequent and inevitable.
</p>

<p>
Under these circumstances, there has arisen in society a
figure which is certainly the most mournful, and in some
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
respects the most awful, upon which the eye of the moralist
can dwell. That unhappy being whose very name is a shame
to speak; who counterfeits with a cold heart the transports
of affection, and submits herself as the passive instrument of
lust; who is scorned and insulted as the vilest of her sex,
and doomed, for the most part, to disease and abject
wretchedness and an early death, appears in every age as the
perpetual symbol of the degradation and the sinfulness of
man. Herself the supreme type of vice, she is ultimately
the most efficient guardian of virtue. But for her, the unchallenged
purity of countless happy homes would be
polluted, and not a few who, in the pride of their untempted
chastity, think of her with an indignant shudder, would
have known the agony of remorse and of despair. On that
one degraded and ignoble form are concentrated the passions
that might have filled the world with shame. She remains,
while creeds and civilisations rise and fall, the eternal priestess
of humanity, blasted for the sins of the people.
</p>

<p>
In dealing with this unhappy being, and with all of her
sex who have violated the law of chastity, the public opinion
of most Christian countries pronounces a sentence of extreme
severity. In the Anglo-Saxon nations especially, a single
fault of this kind is sufficient, at least in the upper and middle
classes, to affix an indelible brand which no time, no virtues,
no penitence can wholly efface. This sentence is probably,
in the first instance, simply the expression of the religious
feeling on the subject, but it is also sometimes defended by
powerful arguments drawn from the interests of society. It
is said that the preservation of domestic purity is a matter of
such transcendent importance that it is right that the most
crushing penalties should be attached to an act which the
imagination can easily transfigure, which legal enactments
can never efficiently control, and to which the most violent
passions may prompt. It is said, too, that an anathema
which drives into obscurity all evidences of sensual passions
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
is peculiarly fitted to restrict their operation; for, more than
any other passions, they are dependent on the imagination,
which is readily fired by the sight of evil. It is added, that
the emphasis with which the vice is stigmatised produces a
corresponding admiration for the opposite virtue, and that a
feeling of the most delicate and scrupulous honour is thus
formed among the female population, which not only preserves
from gross sin, but also dignifies and ennobles the
whole character.
</p>

<p>
In opposition to these views, several considerations of
much weight have been urged. It is argued that, however
persistently society may ignore this form of vice, it exists
nevertheless, and on the most gigantic scale, and that evil
rarely assumes such inveterate and perverting forms as when
it is shrouded in obscurity and veiled by an hypocritical appearance
of unconsciousness. The existence in England of
certainly not less than fifty thousand unhappy women,<note place='foot'>Dr. Vintras, in a remarkable
pamphlet (London, 1867) <hi rend='italic'>On the
Repression of Prostitution</hi>, shows
from the police statistics that the
number of prostitutes <emph>known to
the police</emph> in England and Wales,
in 1864, was 49,370; and this is
certainly much below the entire
number. These, it will be observed,
comprise only the habitual,
professional prostitutes.</note> sunk
in the very lowest depths of vice and misery, shows sufficiently
what an appalling amount of moral evil is festering
uncontrolled, undiscussed, and unalleviated, under the fair
surface of a decorous society. In the eyes of every physician,
and indeed in the eyes of most continental writers who have
adverted to the subject, no other feature of English life
appears so infamous as the fact that an epidemic, which is
one of the most dreadful now existing among mankind, which
communicates itself from the guilty husband to the innocent
wife, and even transmits its taint to her offspring, and which
the experience of other nations conclusively proves may be
vastly diminished, should be suffered to rage unchecked
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
because the Legislature refuses to take official cognisance of
its existence, or proper sanitary measures for its repression.<note place='foot'>Some measures have recently
been taken in a few garrison towns.
The moral sentiment of the community,
it appears, would be
shocked if Liverpool were treated
on the same principles as Portsmouth.
This very painful and
revolting, but most important, subject
has been treated with great
knowledge, impartiality, and
ability, by Parent-Duchâtelet,
in his famous work, <hi rend='italic'>La Prostitution
dans la ville de Paris</hi>.
The third edition contains very
copious supplementary accounts,
furnished by different doctors
in different countries.</note>
If the terrible censure which English public opinion passes
upon every instance of female frailty in some degree diminishes
the number, it does not prevent such instances from
being extremely numerous, and it immeasurably aggravates
the suffering they produce. Acts which in other European
countries would excite only a slight and transient emotion,
spread in England, over a wide circle, all the bitterness of
unmitigated anguish. Acts which naturally neither imply
nor produce a total subversion of the moral feelings, and
which, in other countries, are often followed by happy,
virtuous, and affectionate lives, in England almost invariably
lead to absolute ruin. Infanticide is greatly multiplied,
and a vast proportion of those whose reputations and lives
have been blasted by one momentary sin, are hurled into the
abyss of habitual prostitution&mdash;a condition which, owing to
the sentence of public opinion and the neglect of legislators,
is in no other European country so hopelessly vicious or so
irrevocable.<note place='foot'>Parent-Duchâtelet has given
many statistics, showing the very
large extent to which the French
system of supervision deters those
who were about to enter into
prostitution, and reclaims those
who had entered into it. He and
Dr. Vintras concur in representing
English prostitution as about the
most degraded, and at the same
time the most irrevocable.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is added, too, that the immense multitude who are
thus doomed to the extremity of life-long wretchedness are
not always, perhaps not generally, of those whose dispositions
seem naturally incapable of virtue. The victims of
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
seduction are often led aside quite as much by the ardour of
their affections, and by the vivacity of their intelligence, as
by any vicious propensities.<note place='foot'>Miss Mulock, in her amiable
but rather feeble book, called <hi rend='italic'>A
Woman's Thoughts about Women</hi>,
has some good remarks on this
point (pp. 291-293), which are all
the more valuable, as the authoress
has not the faintest sympathy with
any opinions concerning the character
and position of women which
are not strictly conventional. She
notices the experience of Sunday
school mistresses, that, of their
pupils who are seduced, an extremely
large proportion are <q>of
the very best, refined, intelligent,
truthful, and affectionate.</q></note> Even in the lowest grades, the
most dispassionate observers have detected remains of higher
feelings, which, in a different moral atmosphere, and under
different moral husbandry, would have undoubtedly been
developed.<note place='foot'>See the very singular and painful
chapter in Parent-Duchâtelet,
called <q>Mœurs et Habitudes des
Prostituées.</q> He observes that
they are remarkable for their
kindness to one another in sickness
or in distress; that they are not
unfrequently charitable to poor
people who do not belong to their
class; that when one of them has
a child, it becomes the object of
very general interest and affection;
that most of them have lovers, to
whom they are sincerely attached;
that they rarely fail to show in
the hospitals a very real sense of
shame; and that many of them
entered into their mode of life for
the purpose of supporting aged
parents. One anecdote is worth
giving in the words of the author:
<q>Un médecin n'entrant jamais dans
leurs salles sans ôter légèrement
son chapeau, par cette seule politesse
il sut tellement conquérir
leur confiance qu'il leur faisait
faire tout ce qu'il voulait.</q> This
writer, I may observe, is not a
romance writer or a theorist of any
description. He is simply a physician
who describes the results of
a very large official experience.</note> The statistics of prostitution show that a great
proportion of those who have fallen into it have been impelled
by the most extreme poverty, in many instances
verging upon starvation.<note place='foot'><q>Parent-Duchâtelet atteste
que sur trois mille créatures perdues
trente cinq seulement avaient
un état qui pouvait les nourrir, et
que quatorze cents avaient été précipitées
dans cette horrible vie par
la misère. Une d'elles, quand elle
s'y résolut, n'avait pas mangé depuis
trois jours.</q>&mdash;Legouvé, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.
morale des Femmes</hi>, pp. 322-323.</note>
</p>

<p>
These opposing considerations, which I have very briefly
indicated, and which I do not propose to discuss or to
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
estimate, will be sufficient to exhibit the magnitude of the
problem. In the Greek civilisation, legislators and moralists
endeavoured to meet it by the cordial recognition of two
distinct orders of womanhood<note place='foot'>Concerning the position and
character of Greek women, the
reader may obtain ample information
by consulting Becker's <hi rend='italic'>Charicles</hi>
(translated by Metcalfe, 1845);
Rainneville, <hi rend='italic'>La Femme dans
l'Antiquité</hi> (Paris, 1865); and an
article <q>On Female Society in
Greece,</q> in the twenty-second
volume of the <hi rend='italic'>Quarterly Review</hi>.</note>&mdash;the wife, whose first duty
was fidelity to her husband; the hetæra, or mistress, who
subsisted by her fugitive attachments. The wives of the
Greeks lived in almost absolute seclusion. They were
usually married when very young. Their occupations were to
weave, to spin, to embroider, to superintend the household,
to care for their sick slaves. They lived in a special and
retired part of the house. The more wealthy seldom went
abroad, and never except when accompanied by a female
slave; never attended the public spectacles; received no
male visitors except in the presence of their husbands, and
had not even a seat at their own tables when male guests
were there. Their pre-eminent virtue was fidelity, and it is
probable that this was very strictly and very generally observed.
Their remarkable freedom from temptations, the
public opinion which strongly discouraged any attempt to
seduce them, and the ample sphere for illicit pleasures that
was accorded to the other sex, all contributed to protect it.
On the other hand, living, as they did, almost exclusively
among their female slaves, being deprived of all the educating
influence of male society, and having no place at those public
spectacles which were the chief means of Athenian culture,
their minds must necessarily have been exceedingly contracted.
Thucydides doubtless expressed the prevailing sentiment
of his countrymen when he said that the highest
merit of woman is not to be spoken of either for good or for
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
evil; and Phidias illustrated the same feeling when he represented
the heavenly Aphrodite standing on a tortoise, typifying
thereby the secluded life of a virtuous woman.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Conj. Præc.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In their own restricted sphere their lives were probably
not unhappy. Education and custom rendered the purely
domestic life that was assigned to them a second nature, and
it must in most instances have reconciled them to the extra-matrimonial
connections in which their husbands too frequently
indulged. The prevailing manners were very gentle.
Domestic oppression is scarcely ever spoken of; the husband
lived chiefly in the public place; causes of jealousy and of
dissension could seldom occur; and a feeling of warm affection,
though not a feeling of equality, must doubtless have in most
cases spontaneously arisen. In the writings of Xenophon
we have a charming picture of a husband who had received
into his arms his young wife of fifteen, absolutely ignorant of
the world and of its ways. He speaks to her with extreme
kindness, but in the language that would be used to a little
child. Her task, he tells her, is to be like a queen bee,
dwelling continually at home and superintending the work of
her slaves. She must distribute to each their tasks, must
economise the family income, and must take especial care
that the house is strictly orderly&mdash;the shoes, the pots, and
the clothes always in their places. It is also, he tells her, a
part of her duty to tend her sick slaves; but here his wife
interrupted him, exclaiming, <q>Nay, but that will indeed be
the most agreeable of my offices, if such as I treat with kindness
are likely to be grateful, and to love me more than
before.</q> With a very tender and delicate care to avoid
everything resembling a reproach, the husband persuades
his wife to give up the habits of wearing high-heeled boots,
in order to appear tall, and of colouring her face with vermilion
and white lead. He promises her that if she faithfully
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
performs her duties he will himself be the first and
most devoted of her slaves. He assured Socrates that when
any domestic dispute arose he could extricate himself admirably,
if he was in the right; but that, whenever he was
in the wrong, he found it impossible to convince his wife
that it was otherwise.<note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Econ.</hi> ii.</note>
</p>

<p>
We have another picture of Greek married life in the
writings of Plutarch, but it represents the condition of the
Greek mind at a later period than that of Xenophon. In
Plutarch the wife is represented not as the mere housekeeper,
or as the chief slave of her husband, but as his equal and
his companion. He enforces, in the strongest terms,
reciprocity of obligations, and desires that the minds of
women should be cultivated to the highest point.<note place='foot'>Plut. <hi rend='italic'>Conj. Præc.</hi> There is
also an extremely beautiful picture
of the character of a good wife in
Aristotle. (<hi rend='italic'>Economics</hi>, book i. cap.
vii.)</note> His
precepts of marriage, indeed, fall little if at all below any
that have appeared in modern days. His letter of consolation
to his wife, on the death of their child, breathes a spirit
of the tenderest affection. It is recorded of him that,
having had some dispute with the relations of his wife, she
feared that it might impair their domestic happiness, and she
accordingly persuaded her husband to accompany her on a
pilgrimage to Mount Helicon, where they offered up together
a sacrifice to Love, and prayed that their affection for one
another might never be diminished.
</p>

<p>
In general, however, the position of the virtuous Greek
woman was a very low one. She was under a perpetual
tutelage: first of all to her parents, who disposed of her hand,
then to her husband, and in her days of widowhood to her
sons. In cases of inheritance her male relations were
preferred to her. The privilege of divorce, which, in Athens,
at least, she possessed as well as her husband, appears to
have been practically almost nugatory, on account of the
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
shock which public declarations in the law court gave to the
habits which education and public opinion had formed.
She brought with her, however, a dowry, and the recognised
necessity of endowing daughters was one of the causes of
those frequent expositions which were perpetrated with so
little blame. The Athenian law was also peculiarly careful
and tender in dealing with the interests of female orphans.<note place='foot'>See Alexander's <hi rend='italic'>History of
Women</hi> (London, 1783), vol. i. p. 201.</note>
Plato had argued that women were equal to men; but the
habits of the people were totally opposed to this theory.
Marriage was regarded chiefly in a civic light, as the means of
producing citizens, and in Sparta it was ordered that old or
infirm husbands should cede their young wives to stronger
men, who could produce vigorous soldiers for the State.
The Lacedæmonian treatment of women, which differed in
many respects from that which prevailed in the other Greek
States, while it was utterly destructive of all delicacy of
feeling or action, had undoubtedly the effect of producing a
fierce and masculine patriotism; and many fine examples are
recorded of Spartan mothers devoting their sons on the altar
of their country, rejoicing over their deaths when nobly won,
and infusing their own heroic spirit into the armies of the
people. For the most part, however, the names of virtuous
women seldom appear in Greek history. The simple modesty
which was evinced by Phocion's wife, in the period when her
husband occupied the foremost position in Athens,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Phocion</hi>.</note> and a
few instances of conjugal and filial affection, have been
recorded; but in general the only women who attracted the
notice of the people were the hetæræ, or courtesans.<note place='foot'>Our information concerning
the Greek courtesans is chiefly derived
from the thirteenth book of the
<hi rend='italic'>Deipnosophists</hi> of Athenæus, from
the <hi rend='italic'>Letters</hi> of Alciphron, from the
<hi rend='italic'>Dialogues</hi> of Lucian on courtesans,
and from the oration of Demosthenes
against Neæra. See, too,
Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Memorabilia</hi>, iii. 11;
and among modern books, Becker's
<hi rend='italic'>Charicles</hi>. Athenæus was an
Egyptian, whose exact date is
unknown but who appears to have
survived Ulpian, who died in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>
228. He had access to, and gave
extracts from, many works on this
subject, which have now perished.
Alciphron is believed to have lived
near the time of Lucian.</note>
</p>

<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>

<p>
In order to understand the position which these last
assumed in Greek life, we must transport ourselves in
thought into a moral latitude totally different from our own.
The Greek conception of excellence was the full and perfect
development of humanity in all its organs and functions,
and without any tinge of asceticism. Some parts of human
nature were recognised as higher than others; and to suffer
any of the lower appetites to obscure the mind, restrain the
will and engross the energies of life, was acknowledged to be
disgraceful; but the systematic repression of a natural appetite
was totally foreign to Greek modes of thought. Legislators,
moralists, and the general voice of the people, appear to have
applied these principles almost unreservedly to intercourse
between the sexes, and the most virtuous men habitually and
openly entered into relations which would now be almost
universally censured.
</p>

<p>
The experience, however, of many societies has shown
that a public opinion may accord, in this respect, almost
unlimited licence to one sex, without showing any corresponding
indulgence to the other. But, in Greece, a concurrence
of causes had conspired to bring a certain section
of courtesans into a position they have in no other society
attained. The voluptuous worship of Aphrodite gave a kind
of religious sanction to their profession. Courtesans were
the priestesses in her temples, and those of Corinth were
believed by their prayers to have averted calamities from their
city. Prostitution is said to have entered into the religious
rites of Babylon, Biblis, Cyprus, and Corinth, and these as
well as Miletus, Tenedos, Lesbos, and Abydos became famous
for their schools of vice, which grew up under the shadow of
the temples.<note place='foot'>According to some writers the
word <q>venerari</q> comes from <q>Venerem exercere,</q> on account of the
devotions in the temple of Venus.
See Vossius, <hi rend='italic'>Etymologicon Linguæ
Latinæ</hi>, <q>veneror;</q> also La Mothe le
Vayer, <hi rend='italic'>Lettre</hi> xc.</note>
</p>

<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>

<p>
In the next place, the intense æsthetic enthusiasm that
prevailed was eminently fitted to raise the most beautiful
to honour. In a land and beneath a sky where natural
beauty developed to the highest point, there arose a school
of matchless artists both in painting and in sculpture, and
public games and contests were celebrated, in which supreme
physical perfection was crowned by an assembled people. In
no other period of the world's history was the admiration
of beauty in all its forms so passionate or so universal. It
coloured the whole moral teaching of the time, and led the
chief moralists to regard virtue simply as the highest kind
of supersensual beauty. It appeared in all literature, where
the beauty of form and style was the first of studies. It
supplied at once the inspiration and the rule of all Greek
art. It led the Greek wife to pray, before all other prayers,
for the beauty of her children. It surrounded the most
beautiful with an aureole of admiring reverence. The
courtesan was often the queen of beauty. She was the
model of the statues of Aphrodite, that commanded the
admiration of Greece. Praxiteles was accustomed to reproduce
the form of Phryne, and her statue, carved in gold,
stood in the temple of Apollo at Delphi; and when she was
accused of corrupting the youth of Athens, her advocate,
Hyperides, procured her acquittal by suddenly unveiling her
charms before the dazzled eyes of the assembled judges.
Apelles was at once the painter and the lover of Laïs, and
Alexander gave him, as the choicest gift, his own favourite
concubine, of whom the painter had become enamoured
while pourtraying her. The chief flower-painter of antiquity
acquired his skill through his love of the flower-girl Glycera,
whom he was accustomed to paint among her garlands.
Pindar and Simonides sang the praises of courtesans, and
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
grave philosophers made pilgrimages to visit them, and their
names were known in every city.<note place='foot'>On the connection of the
courtesans with the artistic enthusiasm,
see Raoul Rochette, <hi rend='italic'>Cours
d'Archéologie</hi>, pp. 278-279. See,
too, Athenæus, xiii. 59; Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxxv. 40.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising that, in such a state of thought and
feeling, many of the more ambitious and accomplished women
should have betaken themselves to this career, nor yet that
they should have attained the social position which the
secluded existence and the enforced ignorance of the Greek
wives had left vacant. The courtesan was the one free
woman of Athens, and she often availed herself of her freedom
to acquire a degree of knowledge which enabled her to
add to her other charms an intense intellectual fascination.
Gathering around her the most brilliant artists, poets, historians,
and philosophers, she flung herself unreservedly into
the intellectual and æsthetic enthusiasms of her time, and
soon became the centre of a literary society of matchless
splendour. Aspasia, who was as famous for her genius as
for her beauty, won the passionate love of Pericles. She is
said to have instructed him in eloquence, and to have composed
some of his most famous orations; she was continually
consulted on affairs of state; and Socrates, like other philosophers,
attended her assemblies. Socrates himself has
owned his deep obligations to the instructions of a courtesan
named Diotima. The courtesan Leontium was among the
most ardent disciples of Epicurus.<note place='foot'>See the very curious little
work of Ménage, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Mulierum
Philosopharum</hi> (Lugduni, <hi rend='smallcaps'>mdxc.</hi>);
also Rainneville, <hi rend='italic'>La Femme dans
l'Antiquite</hi>, p. 244. At a much later
date Lucian described the beauty,
accomplishments, generosity, and
even modesty, of Panthea of
Smyrna, the favourite mistress of
Lucius Verus.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another cause probably contributed indirectly to the
elevation of this class, to which it is extremely difficult to
allude in an English book, but which it is impossible altogether
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
to omit, even in the most cursory survey of Greek
morals. Irregular female connections were looked upon as
ordinary and not disgraceful incidents in the life of a good
man, for they were compared with that lower abyss of
unnatural love, which was the deepest and strangest taint of
Greek civilisation. This vice, which never appears in the
writings of Homer and Hesiod, doubtless arose under the
influence of the public games, which, accustoming men to the
contemplation of absolutely nude figures,<note place='foot'>The ζῶμα, which was at first in
use, was discarded by the Lacedæmonians,
and afterwards by the
other Greeks. There are three
curious memoirs tracing the history
of the change, by M. Burette, in
the <hi rend='italic'>Hist. de l'Académie royale des
Inscriptions</hi>, tome i.</note> awoke an unnatural
passion,<note place='foot'>On the causes of paiderastia
in Greece, see the remarks of Mr.
Grote in the review of the <hi rend='italic'>Symposium</hi>,
in his great work on Plato.
The whole subject is very ably
treated by M. Maury, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des
Religions de la Gréce antique</hi>, tome
iii. pp. 35-39. Many facts connected
with it are collected by Döllinger,
in his <hi rend='italic'>Jew and Gentile</hi>, and
by Chateaubriand, in his <hi rend='italic'>Études
historiques</hi>. The chief original
authority is the thirteenth book of
Athenæus, a book of very painful
interest in the history of morals.</note> totally remote from all modern feelings, but which
in Greece it was regarded as heroic to resist.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, in his <hi rend='italic'>Life of Agesilaus</hi>,
dwells on the intense self-control
manifested by that great
man, in refraining from gratifying
a passion he had conceived for a
boy named Megabetes, and Maximus
Tyrius says it deserved greater
praise than the heroism of Leonidas.
(<hi rend='italic'>Diss.</hi> xxv.) Diogenes Laërtius, in
his <hi rend='italic'>Life of Zeno</hi>, the founder of
Stoicism, the most austere of all
ancient sects, praises that philosopher
for being but little addicted
to this vice. Sophocles is said to
have been much addicted to it.</note> The popular
religion in this, as in other cases, was made to bend to the
new vice. Hebe, the cup-bearer of the gods, was replaced
by Ganymede, and the worst vices of earth were transported
to Olympus.<note place='foot'>Some examples of the ascription
of this vice to the divinities
are given by Clem. Alex. <hi rend='italic'>Admonitio
ad Gentes</hi>. Socrates is said to have
maintained that Jupiter loved
Ganymede for his wisdom, as his
name is derived from γάνυμαι and
μῆδος, to be delighted with prudence.
(Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Banquet</hi>.) The
disaster of Cannæ was ascribed to
the jealousy of Juno because a
beautiful boy was introduced into
the temple of Jupiter. (Lactantius,
<hi rend='italic'>Inst. Div.</hi> ii. 17.)</note> Artists sought to reflect the passion in their
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
statues of the Hermaphrodite, of Bacchus, and the more
effeminate Apollo; moralists were known to praise it as the
bond of friendship, and it was spoken of as the inspiring
enthusiasm of the heroic Theban legion of Epaminondas.<note place='foot'>Athenæus, xiii. 78. See, too,
the very revolting book on different
kinds of love, ascribed (it is said
falsely) to Lucian.</note>
In general, however, it was stigmatised as unquestionably a
vice, but it was treated with a levity we can now hardly
conceive. We can scarcely have a better illustration of the
extent to which moral ideas and feelings have changed, than
the fact that the first two Greeks who were considered worthy
of statues by their fellow-countrymen are said to have been
Harmodius and Aristogeiton, who were united by an impure
love, and who were glorified for a political assassination.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxxiv. 9.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is probable that this cause conspired with the others to
dissociate the class of courtesans from the idea of supreme
depravity with which they have usually been connected.
The great majority, however, were sunk in this, as in all
other ages, in abject degradation;<note place='foot'>There is ample evidence of
this in Athenæus, and in the
Dialogues of Lucian on the courtesans.
See, too, Terence, <hi rend='italic'>The
Eunuch</hi>, act v. scene 4, which is
copied from the Greek. The majority
of the class were not called
hetæræ, but πόρναι.</note> comparatively few attained
the condition of hetæræ, and even of these it is probable that
the greater number exhibited the characteristics which in
all ages have attached to their class. Faithlessness, extreme
rapacity, and extravagant luxury, were common among
them; but yet it is unquestionable that there were many
exceptions. The excommunication of society did not press
upon or degrade them; and though they were never regarded
with the same honour as married women, it seems generally
to have been believed that the wife and the courtesan had
each her place and her function in the world, and her own
peculiar type of excellence. The courtesan Leæna, who was
a friend of Harmodius, died in torture rather than reveal
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
the conspiracy of her friend, and the Athenians, in allusion
to her name, caused the statue of a tongueless lioness to be
erected to commemorate her constancy.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De Garrulitate</hi>;
Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxxiv. 19. The feat
of biting out their tongues rather
than reveal secrets, or yield to
passion, is ascribed to a suspiciously
large number of persons. Ménage
cites five besides Leæna. (<hi rend='italic'>Hist.
Mulier. Philos.</hi> pp. 104-108.)</note> The gentle manners
and disinterested affection of a courtesan named Bacchis
were especially recorded, and a very touching letter paints
her character, and describes the regret that followed her to
the tomb.<note place='foot'>See, upon Bacchis, several of
the letters of Alciphron, especially
the very touching letter (x.) on her
death, describing her kindness and
disinterestedness. Athenæus (xiii.
66) relates a curious anecdote illustrating
these aspects of her character.</note> In one of the most remarkable of his pictures of
Greek life, Xenophon describes how Socrates, having heard
of the beauty of the courtesan Theodota, went with his
disciples to ascertain for himself whether the report was
true; how with a quiet humour he questioned her about the
sources of the luxury of her dwelling, and how he proceeded
to sketch for her the qualities she should cultivate in order
to attach her lovers. She ought, he tells her, to shut the
door against the insolent, to watch her lovers in sickness, to
rejoice greatly when they succeed in anything honourable,
to love tenderly those who love her. Having carried on a
cheerful and perfectly unembarrassed conversation with her,
with no kind of reproach on his part, either expressed or
implied, and with no trace either of the timidity or effrontery
of conscious guilt upon hers, the best and wisest of the Greeks
left his hostess with a graceful compliment to her beauty.<note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Memorab.</hi> iii. 11.</note>
</p>

<p>
My task in describing this aspect of Greek life has been
an eminently unpleasing one, and I should certainly not
have entered upon even the baldest and most guarded
disquisition on a subject so difficult, painful, and delicate,
had it not been absolutely indispensable to a history of
morals to give at least an outline of the progress that has
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
been effected in this sphere. What I have written will
sufficiently explain why Greece, which was fertile, beyond all
other lands, in great men, was so remarkably barren of
great women. It will show, too, that while the Greek
moralists recognised, like ourselves, the distinction between
the higher and the lower sides of our nature, they differed
very widely from modern public opinion in the standard of
morals they enforced. The Christian doctrine, that it is
criminal to gratify a powerful and a transient physical appetite,
except under the condition of a lifelong contract, was
altogether unknown. Strict duties were imposed upon Greek
wives. Duties were imposed at a later period, though less
strictly, upon the husband. Unnatural love was stigmatised,
but with a levity of censure which to a modern mind appears
inexpressibly revolting. Some slight legal disqualifications
rested upon the whole class of hetæræ, and, though more
admired, they were less respected than women who had
adopted a domestic life; but a combination of circumstances
had raised them, in actual worth and in popular estimation,
to an unexampled elevation, and an aversion to marriage
became very general, and extra-matrimonial connections
were formed with the most perfect frankness and publicity.
</p>

<p>
If we now turn to the Roman civilisation, we shall find
that some important advances had been made in the condition
of women. The virtue of chastity has, as I have shown,
been regarded in two different ways. The utilitarian view,
which commonly prevails in countries where a political
spirit is more powerful than a religious spirit, regards
marriage as the ideal state, and to promote the happiness,
sanctity, and security of this state is the main object of all its
precepts. The mystical view which rests upon the natural
feeling of shame, and which, as history proves, has prevailed
especially where political sentiment is very low, and religious
sentiment very strong, regards virginity as its supreme type,
and marriage as simply the most pardonable declension from
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
ideal purity. It is, I think, a very remarkable fact, that at
the head of the religious system of Rome we find two sacerdotal
bodies which appear respectively to typify these ideas.
The Flamens of Jupiter and the Vestal Virgins were the two
most sacred orders in Rome. The ministrations of each were
believed to be vitally important to the State. Each could
officiate only within the walls of Rome. Each was appointed
with the most imposing ceremonies. Each was honoured with
the most profound reverence. But in one important respect
they differed. The Vestal was the type of virginity, and
her purity was guarded by the most terrific penalties. The
Flamen, on the other hand, was the representative of Roman
marriage in its strictest and holiest form. He was necessarily
married. His marriage was celebrated with the most solemn
rites. It could only be dissolved by death. If his wife died,
he was degraded from his office.<note place='foot'>On the Flamens, see Aulus Gell. <hi rend='italic'>Noct.</hi> x. 15.</note>
</p>

<p>
Of these two orders, there can be no question that the
Flamen was the most faithful expression of the Roman sentiments.
The Roman religion was essentially domestic, and
it was a main object of the legislator to surround marriage
with every circumstance of dignity and solemnity. Monogamy
was, from the earliest times, strictly enjoined; and it was
one of the great benefits that have resulted from the
expansion of Roman power, that it made this type dominant
in Europe. In the legends of early Rome we have ample
evidence both of the high moral estimate of women, and
of their prominence in Roman life. The tragedies of Lucretia
and of Virginia display a delicacy of honour, a sense of the
supreme excellence of unsullied purity, which no Christian
nation could surpass. The legends of the Sabine women
interceding between their parents and their husbands, and
thus saving the infant republic, and of the mother of Coriolanus
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
averting by her prayers the ruin impending over her
country, entitled women to claim their share in the patriotic
glories of Rome. A temple of Venus Calva was associated
with the legend of Roman ladies, who, in an hour of danger,
cut off their long tresses to make bowstrings for the soldiers.<note place='foot'>Capitolinus, <hi rend='italic'>Maximinus Junior</hi>.</note>
Another temple preserved to all posterity the memory of the
filial piety of that Roman woman who, when her mother was
condemned to be starved to death, obtained permission to
visit her in her prison, and was discovered feeding her from her
breast.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> vii. 36.
There is (as is well known) a
similar legend of a daughter thus
feeding her father. Val. Max.
Lib. v. cap. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The legal position, however, of the Roman wife was for
a long period extremely low. The Roman family was constituted
on the principle of the uncontrolled authority of its
head, both over his wife and over his children, and he could
repudiate the former at will. Neither the custom of gifts to
the father of the bride, nor the custom of dowries, appears to
have existed in the earliest period of Roman history; but
the father disposed absolutely of the hand of his daughter,
and sometimes even possessed the power of breaking off
marriages that had been actually contracted.<note place='foot'>This appears from the first
act of the <hi rend='italic'>Stichus</hi> of Plautus. The
power appears to have become quite
obsolete during the Empire but the
first legal act (which was rather of
the nature of an exhortation than
of a command) against it was
issued by Antoninus Pius, and it
was only definitely abolished under
Diocletian. (Laboulaye, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches
sur la condition civile et politique
des femmes</hi>, pp. 16-17.)</note> In the
forms of marriage, however, which were usual in the
earlier periods of Rome, the absolute power passed into
the hands of the husband, and he had the right, in
some cases, of putting her to death.<note place='foot'>Aul. Gell. <hi rend='italic'>Noct.</hi> x. 23.</note> Law and public opinion
combined in making matrimonial purity most strict. For
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
five hundred and twenty years, it was said, there was no
such thing as a divorce in Rome.<note place='foot'>Val. Maximus, ii. 1, § 4; Aul.
Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>Noct.</hi> iv. 3.</note> Manners were so severe,
that a senator was censured for indecency because he had
kissed his wife in the presence of their daughter.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxviii.
4.</note> It was
considered in a high degree disgraceful for a Roman mother
to delegate to a nurse the duty of suckling her child.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>De Oratoribus</hi>, xxviii.</note>
Sumptuary laws regulated with the most minute severity all
the details of domestic economy.<note place='foot'>See Aulus Gellius, Noct. ii. 24.</note> The courtesan class,
though probably numerous and certainly uncontrolled, were
regarded with much contempt. The disgrace of publicly
professing themselves members of it was believed to be a
sufficient punishment;<note place='foot'><q>More inter veteres recepto,
qui satis pœnarum adversum impudicas
in ipsa professione flagitii
credebant.</q>&mdash;Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> ii. 85.</note> and an old law, which was probably
intended to teach in symbol the duties of married life,
enjoined that no such person should touch the altar of Juno.<note place='foot'>Aul. Gell. iv. 3. Juno was the
goddess of marriage.</note>
It was related of a certain ædile, that he failed to obtain
redress for an assault which had been made upon him, because
it had occurred in a house of ill-fame, in which it was disgraceful
for a Roman magistrate to be found.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iv. 14.</note> The sanctity
of female purity was believed to be attested by all nature.
The most savage animals became tame before a virgin.<note place='foot'>The well-known superstition
about the lion, &amp;c., becoming docile
before a virgin is, I believe, as old
as Roman times. St. Isidore
mentions that rhinoceroses were
said to be captured by young
girls being put in their way to
fascinate them. (Legendre, <hi rend='italic'>Traité
de l'Opinion</hi>, tome ii. p. 35.)</note>
When a woman walked naked round a field, caterpillars and
all loathsome insects fell dead before her.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxviii. 23.</note> It was said that
drowned men floated on their backs, and drowned women on
their faces; and this, in the opinion of Roman naturalists,
was due to the superior purity of the latter.<note place='foot'>Ibid. vii. 18.</note>
</p>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<p>
It was a remark of Aristotle, that the superiority of the
Greeks to the barbarians was shown, among other things,
in the fact that the Greeks did not, like other nations, regard
their wives as slaves, but treated them as helpmates and
companions. A Roman writer has appealed, on the whole
with greater justice, to the treatment of wives by his fellow
countrymen, as a proof of the superiority of Roman to Greek
civilisation. He has observed that while the Greeks kept
their wives in a special quarter in the interior of their houses,
and never permitted them to sit at banquets except with
their relatives, or to see any male except in the presence of a
relative, no Roman ever hesitated to lead his wife with him
to the feast, or to place the mother of the family at the head
of his table.<note place='foot'><q>Quem enim Romanorum pudet
uxorem ducere in convivium? aut
cujus materfamilias non primum
locum tenet ædium, atque in celebritate
versatur? quod multo fit
aliter in Græcia. Nam neque in
convivium adhibetur, nisi propinquorum,
neque sedet nisi in interiore
parte ædium quæ <emph>gynæcontis</emph> appellatur,
quo nemo accedit, nisi propinqua
cognatione conjunctus.</q>&mdash;Corn.
Nepos. præfat.</note> Whether, in the period when wives were
completely subject to the rule of their husbands, much
domestic oppression occurred, it is now impossible to say.
A temple dedicated to a goddess named Viriplaca, whose
mission was to appease husbands, was worshipped by Roman
women on the Palatine;<note place='foot'>Val. Max. ii. 1, § 6.</note> and a strange and improbable, if not
incredible story, is related by Livy, of the discovery during
the Republic, of a vast conspiracy by Roman wives to poison
their husbands.<note place='foot'>Liv. viii. 18.</note> On the whole, however, it is probable that
the Roman matron was from the earliest period a name of
honour;<note place='foot'>See Val. Max. ii. 1.</note> that the beautiful sentence of a jurisconsult of the
Empire, who defined marriage as a lifelong fellowship of all
divine and human rights,<note place='foot'><q>Nuptiæ sunt conjunctio maris
et feminæ, et consortium omnis
vitæ, divini et humani juris communicatio.</q>&mdash;Modestinus.</note> expressed most faithfully the
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
feelings of the people, and that female virtue had in every
age a considerable place in Roman biographies.<note place='foot'>Livy, xxxiv. 5. There is a
fine collection of legends or histories
of heroic women (but chiefly
Greek) in Clem. Alexand. <hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi>
iv. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have already enumerated the chief causes of that
complete dissolution of Roman morals which began shortly
after the Punic wars, which contributed very largely to the
destruction of the Republic, and which attained its climax
under the Cæsars. There are few examples in history of a
revolution pervading so completely every sphere of religious,
domestic, social, and political life. Philosophical scepticism
corroded the ancient religions. An inundation of Eastern
luxury and Eastern morals submerged all the old habits of
austere simplicity. The civil wars and the Empire degraded
the character of the people, and the exaggerated prudery of
republican manners only served to make the rebound into
vice the more irresistible. In the fierce outburst of ungovernable
and almost frantic depravity that marked this
evil period, the violations of female virtue were infamously
prominent. The vast multiplication of slaves, which is in
every age peculiarly fatal to moral purity; the fact that a
great proportion of those slaves were chosen from the most
voluptuous provinces of the Empire; the games of Flora, in
which races of naked courtesans were exhibited; the pantomimes,
which derived their charms chiefly from the audacious
indecencies of the actors; the influx of the Greek and Asiatic
hetæræ who were attracted by the wealth of the metropolis;
the licentious paintings which began to adorn every house;
the rise of Baiæ, which rivalled the luxury and surpassed the
beauty of the chief centres of Asiatic vice, combining with
the intoxication of great wealth suddenly acquired, with the
disruption, through many causes, of all the ancient habits and
beliefs, and with the tendency to pleasure which the closing
of the paths of honourable political ambition by the imperial
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
despotism, naturally produced, had all their part in preparing
those orgies of vice which the writers of the Empire
reveal. Most scholars will, I suppose, retain a vivid recollection
of the new insight into the extent and wildness of
human guilt which they obtained when they first opened the
pages of Suetonius or Lampridius; and the sixth Satire of
Juvenal paints with a fierce energy, though probably with
the natural exaggeration of a satirist, the extent to which
corruption had spread among the women. It was found
necessary, under Tiberius, to make a special law prohibiting
members of noble houses from enrolling themselves as prostitutes.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> ii. 85. This
decree was on account of a patrician
lady named Vistilia having so enrolled
herself.</note>
The extreme coarseness of the Roman disposition
prevented sensuality from assuming that æsthetic character
which had made it in Greece the parent of Art, and had
very profoundly modified its influence, while the passion for
gladiatorial shows often allied it somewhat unnaturally with
cruelty. There have certainly been many periods in history
when virtue was more rare than under the Cæsars; but there
has probably never been a period when vice was more
extravagant or uncontrolled. Young emperors especially,
who were surrounded by swarms of sycophants and panders,
and who often lived in continual dread of assassination,
plunged with the most reckless and feverish excitement into
every variety of abnormal lust. The reticence which has
always more or less characterised modern society and modern
writers was unknown, and the unblushing, undisguised
obscenity of the Epigrams of Martial, of the Romances of
Apuleius and Petronius, and of some of the Dialogues of
Lucian, reflected but too faithfully the spirit of their time.
</p>

<p>
There had arisen, too, partly through vicious causes, and
partly, I suppose, through the unfavourable influence which
the attraction of the public institutions exercised on domestic
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
life, a great and general indisposition towards marriage,
which Augustus attempted in vain to arrest by his laws
against celibacy, and by conferring many privileges on
the fathers of three children.<note place='foot'>Dion Cassius, liv. 16, lvi. 10.</note> A singularly curious speech
is preserved, which is said to have been delivered on this
subject, shortly before the close of the Republic, by Metellus
Numidicus, in order, if possible, to overcome this indisposition.
<q>If, Romans,</q> he said, <q>we could live without wives,
we should all keep free from that source of trouble; but since
nature has ordained that men can neither live sufficiently
agreeably with wives, nor at all without them, let us consider
the perpetual endurance of our race rather than our own
brief enjoyment.</q><note place='foot'><q>Si sine uxore possemus,
Quirites, esse, omnes ea molestia
careremus; sed quoniam ita natura
tradidit, ut nec cum illis satis commode
nec sine illis ullo modo vivi
possit, saluti perpetuæ potius quam
brevi voluptati consulendum.</q>&mdash;Aulus
Gellius, <hi rend='italic'>Noct.</hi> i. 6. Some of
the audience, we are told, thought
that, in exhorting to matrimony,
the speaker should have concealed
its undoubted evils. It was decided,
however, that it was more honourable
to tell the whole truth. Stobæus
(<hi rend='italic'>Sententiæ</hi>) has preserved a
number of harsh and often heartless
sayings about wives, that were
popular among the Greeks. It was
a saying of a Greek poet, that <q>marriage
brings only two happy days&mdash;the
day when the husband first
clasps his wife to his breast, and
the day when he lays her in the
tomb;</q> and in Rome it became a
proverbial saying, that a wife was
only good <q>in thalamo vel in tumulo.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
In the midst of this torrent of corruption a great change
was passing over the legal position of Roman women. They
had at first been in a condition of absolute subjection or
subordination to their relations. They arrived, during the
Empire, at a point of freedom and dignity which they subsequently
lost, and have never altogether regained. The
Romans recognised two distinct classes of marriages:
the stricter, and, in the eyes of the law, more honourable,
forms, which placed the woman <q>in the hand</q> of her husband
and gave him an almost absolute authority over her person
and her property; and a less strict form, which left her
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
legal position unchanged. The former, which were general
during the Republic, were of three kinds&mdash;the <q>confarreatio,</q>
which was celebrated and could only be dissolved by the most
solemn religious ceremonies, and was jealously restricted to
patricians; the <q>coemptio,</q> which was purely civil, and
derived its name from a symbolical sale; and the <q>usus,</q>
which was effected by the mere cohabitation of a woman with
a man without interruption for the space of a year. Under
the Empire, however, these kinds of marriage became
almost wholly obsolete; a laxer form, resting upon a simple
mutual agreement, without any religious or civil ceremony,
was general, and it had this very important consequence,
that the woman so married remained, in the eyes of the law,
in the family of her father, and was under his guardianship,
not under the guardianship of her husband. But the old
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>patria potestas</foreign> had become completely obsolete, and the
practical effect of the general adoption of this form of marriage
was the absolute legal independence of the wife. With
the exception of her dowry, which passed into the hands of
her husband, she held her property in her own right; she
inherited her share of the wealth of her father, and she
retained it altogether independently of her husband. A very
considerable portion of Roman wealth thus passed into the
uncontrolled possession of women. The private man of
business of the wife was a favourite character with the
comedians, and the tyranny exercised by rich wives over
their husbands&mdash;to whom it is said they sometimes lent
money at high interest&mdash;a continual theme of satirists.<note place='foot'>Friedländer, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Mœurs
romaines</hi>, tome i. pp. 360-364. On
the great influence exercised by
Roman ladies on political affairs
some remarkable passages are collected
in Denis, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Idées
Morales</hi>, tome ii. pp. 98-99. This
author is particularly valuable in
all that relates to the history of
domestic morals. The <hi rend='italic'>Asinaria</hi> of
Plautus, and some of the epigrams
of Martial, throw much light upon
this subject.</note>
</p>

<p>
A complete revolution had thus passed over the constitution
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
of the family. Instead of being constructed on the
principle of autocracy, it was constructed on the principle of
coequal partnership. The legal position of the wife had
become one of complete independence, while her social
position was one of great dignity. The more conservative
spirits were naturally alarmed at the change, and two
measures were taken to arrest it. The Oppian law was
designed to restrain the luxury of women; but, in spite of
the strenuous exertions of Cato, this law was speedily repealed.<note place='foot'>See the very remarkable discussion
about this repeal in Livy,
lib. xxxiv. cap. 1-8.</note>
A more important measure was the Voconian law,
which restricted within very narrow limits the property
which women might inherit; but public opinion never fully
acquiesced in it, and by several legal subterfuges its operation
was partially evaded.<note place='foot'>Legouvé, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Morale des
Femmes</hi>, pp. 23-26. St. Augustine
denounced this law as the most unjust
that could be mentioned or
even conceived. <q>Qua lege quid
iniquius dici aut cogitari possit,
ignoro.</q>&mdash;St. Aug. <hi rend='italic'>De Civ. Dei</hi>, iii.
21&mdash;a curious illustration of the
difference between the habits of
thought of his time and those of
the middle ages, when daughters
were habitually sacrificed, without
a protest, by the feudal laws.</note>
</p>

<p>
Another and a still more important consequence resulted
from the changed form of marriage. Being looked upon
merely as a civil contract, entered into for the happiness of
the contracting parties, its continuance depended upon
mutual consent. Either party might dissolve it at will, and
the dissolution gave both parties a right to remarry. There
can be no question that under this system the obligations of
marriage were treated with extreme levity. We find Cicero
repudiating his wife Terentia, because he desired a new
dowry;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>.</note> Augustus compelling the husband of Livia to repudiate
her when she was already pregnant, that he might
marry her himself;<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> i. 10.</note> Cato ceding his wife, with the consent
of her father, to his friend Hortensius, and resuming her
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
after his death;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi>; Lucan, <hi rend='italic'>Pharsal</hi>.
ii.</note> Mæcenas continually changing his wife;<note place='foot'>Senec. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxiv.</note>
Sempronius Sophus repudiating his wife, because she had
once been to the public games without his knowledge;<note place='foot'>Val. Max. vi. 3.</note>
Paulus Æmilius taking the same step without assigning any
reason, and defending himself by saying, <q>My shoes are new
and well made, but no one knows where they pinch me.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Paul. Æmil.</hi> It is
not quite clear whether this remark
was made by Paulus himself.</note>
Nor did women show less alacrity in repudiating their
husbands. Seneca denounced this evil with especial
vehemence, declaring that divorce in Rome no longer brought
with it any shame, and that there were women who reckoned
their years rather by their husbands than by the consuls.<note place='foot'>Sen. <hi rend='italic'>De Benef.</hi> iii. 16. See,
too, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xcv. <hi rend='italic'>Ad Helv.</hi> xvi.</note>
Christians and Pagans echoed the same complaint. According
to Tertullian, <q>divorce is the fruit of marriage.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> 6.</note>
Martial speaks of a woman who had already arrived at her
tenth husband;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epig.</hi> vi. 7.</note> Juvenal, of a woman having eight husbands
in five years.<note place='foot'>Juv. <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> vi. 230.</note> But the most extraordinary recorded instance
of this kind is related by St. Jerome, who assures us that
there existed at Rome a wife who was married to her twenty-third
husband, she herself being his twenty-first wife.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> 2.</note>
</p>

<p>
These are, no doubt, extreme cases; but it is unquestionable
that the stability of married life was very seriously
impaired. It would be easy, however, to exaggerate the
influence of legal changes in affecting it. In a purer state of
public opinion a very wide latitude of divorce might probably
have been allowed to both parties, without any serious consequence.
The right of repudiation, which the husband had
always possessed, was, as we have seen, in the Republic
never or very rarely exercised. Of those who scandalised
good men by the rapid recurrence of their marriages, probably
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
most, if marriage had been indissoluble, would have refrained
from entering into it, and would have contented themselves
with many informal connections, or, if they had married,
would have gratified their love of change by simple adultery.
A vast wave of corruption had flowed in upon Rome, and
under any system of law it would have penetrated into
domestic life. Laws prohibiting all divorce have never
secured the purity of married life in ages of great corruption,
nor did the latitude which was accorded in imperial Rome
prevent the existence of a very large amount of female
virtue.
</p>

<p>
I have observed, in a former chapter, that the moral
contrasts shown in ancient life surpass those of modern
societies, in which we very rarely find clusters of heroic or
illustrious men arising in nations that are in general very
ignorant or very corrupt. I have endeavoured to account
for this fact by showing that the moral agencies of antiquity
were in general much more fitted to develop virtue than to
repress vice, and that they raised noble natures to almost the
highest conceivable point of excellence, while they entirely
failed to coerce or to attenuate the corruption of the depraved.
In the female life of Imperial Rome we find these contrasts
vividly displayed. There can be no question that the moral
tone of the sex was extremely low&mdash;lower, probably, than
in France under the Regency, or in England under the
Restoration&mdash;and it is also certain that frightful excesses of
unnatural passion, of which the most corrupt of modern
courts present no parallel, were perpetrated with but little
concealment on the Palatine. Yet there is probably no
period in which examples of conjugal heroism and fidelity
appear more frequently than in this very age, in which
marriage was most free and in which corruption was so
general. Much simplicity of manners continued to co-exist
with the excesses of an almost unbridled luxury. Augustus,
we are told, used to make his daughters and granddaughters
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
weave and spin, and his wife and sister made most of the
clothes he wore.<note place='foot'>Sueton. <hi rend='italic'>Aug.</hi> Charlemagne,
in like manner, made his daughters
work in wool. (Eginhardus, <hi rend='italic'>Vit.
Car. Mag.</hi> xix.)</note> The skill of wives in domestic economy,
and especially in spinning, was frequently noticed in their
epitaphs.<note place='foot'>Friedländer, <hi rend='italic'>Mœurs romaines
du règne d'Auguste à la fin des
Antonins</hi> (trad. franç.), tome i. p.
414.</note> Intellectual culture was much diffused among
them,<note place='foot'>Much evidence of this is collected
by Friedländer, tome i. pp.
387-395.</note> and we meet with several noble specimens, in the sex,
of large and accomplished minds united with all the gracefulness
of intense womanhood, and all the fidelity of the truest
love. Such were Cornelia, the brilliant and devoted wife of
Pompey,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Pompeius</hi>.</note> Marcia, the friend, and Helvia, the mother of
Seneca. The Northern Italian cities had in a great degree
escaped the contamination of the times, and Padua and
Brescia were especially noted for the virtue of their women.<note place='foot'>Martial, xi. 16. Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> i.
14.</note>
In an age of extravagant sensuality a noble lady, named
Mallonia, plunged her dagger in her heart rather than yield
to the embraces of Tiberius.<note place='foot'>Suet. <hi rend='italic'>Tiberius</hi>, xlv.</note> To the period when the legal
bond of marriage was most relaxed must be assigned most of
those noble examples of the constancy of Roman wives,
which have been for so many generations household tales
among mankind. Who has not read with emotion of the
tenderness and heroism of Porcia, claiming her right to share
in the trouble which clouded her husband's brow; how,
doubting her own courage, she did not venture to ask
Brutus to reveal to her his enterprise till she had secretly
tried her power of endurance by piercing her thigh with a
knife; how once, and but once in his presence, her noble
spirit failed, when, as she was about to separate from him
for the last time, her eye chanced to fall upon a picture of
the parting interview of Hector and Andromache?<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Brutus</hi>.</note> Paulina,
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
the wife of Seneca, opened her own veins in order to
accompany her husband to the grave; when much blood
had already flowed, her slaves and freedmen bound her
wounds, and thus compelled her to live; but the Romans
ever after observed with reverence the sacred pallor of
her countenance&mdash;the memorial of her act.<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> xv. 63, 64.</note> When Pætus
was condemned to die by his own hand, those who knew the
love which his wife Arria bore him, and the heroic fervour
of her character, predicted that she would not long survive
him. Thrasea, who had married her daughter, endeavoured
to dissuade her from suicide by saying, <q>If I am ever called
upon to perish, would you wish your daughter to die with
me?</q> She answered, <q>Yes, if she will have then lived with
you as long and as happily as I with Pætus.</q> Her friends
attempted, by carefully watching her, to secure her safety,
but she dashed her head against the wall with such force that
she fell upon the ground, and then, rising up, she said, <q>I
told you I would find a hard way to death if you refuse me
an easy way.</q> All attempts to restrain her were then
abandoned, and her death was perhaps the most majestic in
antiquity. Pætus for a moment hesitated to strike the fatal
blow; but his wife, taking the dagger, plunged it deeply
into her own breast, and then, drawing it out, gave it, all
reeking as it was, to her husband, exclaiming, with her
dying breath, <q>My Pætus, it does not pain.</q><note place='foot'><q>Pæte, non dolet.</q>&mdash;Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
iii. 16; Martial, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> i. 14.</note>
</p>

<p>
The form of the elder Arria towers grandly above her
fellows, but many other Roman wives in the days of the
early Cæsars and of Domitian exhibited a very similar fidelity.
Over the dark waters of the Euxine, into those unknown
and inhospitable regions from which the Roman imagination
recoiled with a peculiar horror, many noble ladies freely
followed their husbands, and there were some wives who
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
refused to survive them.<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> xvi. 10-11;
<hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> i. 3. See, too, Friedländer,
tome i. p. 406.</note> The younger Arria was the faithful
companion of Thrasea during his heroic life, and when he
died she was only persuaded to live that she might bring up
their daughters.<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> xvi. 34.</note> She spent the closing days of her life with
Domitian in exile;<note place='foot'>Pliny mentions her return
after the death of the tyrant (<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
iii. 11).</note> while her daughter, who was as remarkable
for the gentleness as for the dignity of her character,<note place='foot'><q>Quod paucis datum est, non
minus amabilis quam veneranda.</q>&mdash;Plin.
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> vii. 19.</note>
went twice into exile with her husband Helvidius, and was
once banished, after his death, for defending his memory.<note place='foot'>See Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> vii. 19. Dion
Cassius and Tacitus relate the
exiles of Helvidius, who appears
to have been rather intemperate
and unreasonable.</note>
Incidental notices in historians, and a few inscriptions which
have happened to remain, show us that such instances were
not uncommon, and in Roman epitaphs no feature is more
remarkable than the deep and passionate expressions of conjugal
love that continually occur.<note place='foot'>Friedländer gives many and
most touching examples, tome i. pp.
410-414.</note> It would be difficult to
find a more touching image of that love, than the medallion
which is so common on the Roman sarcophagi, in which
husband and wife are represented together, each with an arm
thrown fondly over the shoulder of the other, united in death
as they had been in life, and meeting it with an aspect of
perfect calm, because they were companions in the tomb.
</p>

<p>
In the latter days of the Pagan Empire some measures
were taken to repress the profligacy that was so prevalent.
Domitian enforced the old Scantinian law against unnatural
love.<note place='foot'>Suet. <hi rend='italic'>Dom.</hi> viii.</note> Vespasian moderated the luxury of the court;
Macrinus caused those who had committed adultery to be
bound together and burnt alive.<note place='foot'>Capitolinus, <hi rend='italic'>Macrinus</hi>.</note> A practice of men and
women bathing together was condemned by Hadrian, and
afterwards by Alexander Severus, but was only finally suppressed
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
by Constantine. Alexander Severus and Philip
waged an energetic war against panders.<note place='foot'>Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>A. Severus</hi>.</note> The extreme
excesses of this, as of most forms of vice, were probably
much diminished after the accession of the Antonines; but
Rome continued to be a centre of very great corruption till
the influence of Christianity, the removal of the court to
Constantinople, and the impoverishment that followed the
barbarian conquests, in a measure corrected the evil.
</p>

<p>
Among the moralists, however, some important steps
were taken. One of the most important was a very clear
assertion of the reciprocity of that obligation to fidelity in
marriage which in the early stages of society had been imposed
almost exclusively upon wives.<note place='foot'>In the oration against Neæra,
which is ascribed to Demosthenes,
but is of doubtful genuineness, the
licence accorded to husbands is
spoken of as a matter of course:
<q>We keep mistresses for our pleasures,
concubines for constant attendance,
and wives to bear us
legitimate children, and to be our
faithful housekeepers.</q></note> The legends of
Clytemnestra and of Medea reveal the feelings of fierce
resentment which were sometimes produced among Greek
wives by the almost unlimited indulgence that was accorded
to their husbands;<note place='foot'>There is a remarkable passage
on the feelings of wives, in different
nations, upon this point, in
Athenæus, xiii. 3. See, too, Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Conj. Præc.</hi></note> and it is told of Andromache, as the
supreme instance of her love of Hector, that she cared for his
illegitimate children as much as for her own.<note place='foot'>Euripid. <hi rend='italic'>Andromache</hi>.</note> In early
Rome, the obligations of husbands were never, I imagine,
altogether unfelt; but they were rarely or never enforced,
nor were they ever regarded as bearing any kind of equality
to those imposed upon the wife. The term adultery, and all
the legal penalties connected with it, were restricted to the
infractions by a wife of the nuptial tie. Among the many
instances of magnanimity recorded of Roman wives, few are
more touching than that of Tertia Æmilia, the faithful wife
of Scipio. She discovered that her husband had become
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
enamoured of one of her slaves; but she bore her pain in
silence, and when he died she gave liberty to her captive, for
she could not bear that she should remain in servitude whom
her dear lord had loved.<note place='foot'>Valer. Max. vi. 7, § 1. Some
very scandalous instances of cynicism
on the part of Roman husbands
are recorded. Thus, Augustus
had many mistresses, <q>Quæ [virgines]
sibi undique etiam <emph>ab uxore</emph>
conquirerentur.</q>&mdash;Sueton. <hi rend='italic'>Aug.</hi> lxxi.
When the wife of Verus, the colleague
of Marcus Aurelius, complained
of the tastes of her husband,
he answered, <q>Uxor enim dignitatis
nomen est, non voluptatis.</q>&mdash;Spartian.
<hi rend='italic'>Verus</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Aristotle had clearly asserted the duty of husbands to observe
in marriage the same fidelity as they expected from their
wives,<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Econom.</hi> i. 4-8-9.</note> and at a later period both Plutarch and Seneca enforced
this duty in the strongest and most unequivocal manner.<note place='foot'>Plutarch enforces the duty at
length, in his very beautiful work
on marriage. In case husbands are
guilty of infidelity, he recommends
their wives to preserve a prudent
blindness, reflecting that it is out
of respect for them that they choose
another woman as the companion
of their intemperance. Seneca
touches briefly, but unequivocally,
on the subject: <q>Scis improbum
esse qui ab uxore pudicitiam exigit,
ipse alienarum corruptor uxorum.
Scis ut illi nil cum adultero, sic
nihil tibi esse debere cum pellice.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
xciv. <q>Sciet in uxorem
gravissimum esse genus injuriæ,
habere pellicem.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xcv.</note>
The degree to which, in theory at least, it won its way in
Roman life is shown by its recognition as a legal maxim by
Ulpian,<note place='foot'><q>Periniquum enim videtur
esse, ut pudicitiam vir ab uxore
exigat, quam ipse non exhibeat.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cod.
Just. Dig.</hi> xlviii. 5-13.</note> and by its appearance in a formal judgment of
Antoninus Pius, who, while issuing, at the request of a
husband, a condemnation for adultery against a guilty wife,
appended to it this remarkable condition: <q>Provided always
it is established that by your life you gave her an example of
fidelity. It would be unjust that a husband should exact a
fidelity he does not himself keep.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by St. Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>De
Conj. Adult.</hi> ii. 19. Plautus, long
before, had made one of his characters
complain of the injustice of
the laws which punished unchaste
wives but not unchaste husbands,
and ask why, since every honest
woman is contented with one husband,
every honest man should not
be contented with one wife? (<hi rend='italic'>Mercator</hi>,
Act iv. scene 5.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>

<p>
Another change, which may be dimly descried in the
later Pagan society, was a tendency to regard purity rather
in a mystical point of view, as essentially good, than in the
utilitarian point of view. This change resulted chiefly from
the rise of the Neoplatonic and Pythagorean philosophies,
which concurred in regarding the body, with its passions, as
essentially evil, and in representing all virtue as a purification
from its taint. Its most important consequence was a
somewhat stricter view of pre-nuptial unchastity, which in
the case of men, and when it was not excessive, and did not
take the form of adultery, had previously been uncensured,
or was looked upon with a disapprobation so slight as
scarcely to amount to censure. The elder Cato had expressly
justified it;<note place='foot'>Horace, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> i. 2.</note> and Cicero has left us an extremely
curious judgment on the subject, which shows at a glance
the feelings of the people, and the vast revolution that,
under the influence of Christianity, has been effected in, at
least, the professions of mankind. <q>If there be any one,</q> he
says, <q>who thinks that young men should be altogether restrained
from the love of courtesans, he is indeed very
severe. I am not prepared to deny his position; but he
differs not only from the licence of our age, but also from the
customs and allowances of our ancestors. When, indeed,
was this not done? When was it blamed? When was it
not allowed? When was that which is now lawful not
lawful?</q><note place='foot'><q>Verum si quis est qui etiam
meretriciis amoribus interdictum
juventuti putet, est ille quidem
valde severus; negare non possum;
sed abhorret non modo ab hujus
sæculi licentia, verum etiam a majorum
consuetudine atque concessis.
Quando enim hoc factum non est?
Quando reprehensum? Quando non
permissum? Quando denique fuit
ut quod licet non liceret?</q>&mdash;Cicero,
<hi rend='italic'>Pro Cælio</hi>, cap. xx. The whole
speech is well worthy of the attention
of those who would understand
Roman feelings on these matters;
but it should be remembered that
it is the speech of a lawyer defending
a dissolute client.</note> Epictetus, who on most subjects was among the
most austere of the Stoics, recommends his disciples to abstain,
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
<q>as far as possible,</q> from pre-nuptial connections, and
at least from those which were adulterous and unlawful, but
not to blame those who were less strict.<note place='foot'>Περί ἀφροδίσια, εἰς δύναμιν πρὸ
γάμου καθαρευτέον. ἁπτομένῳ δέ,
ὢν νομιμόν ἐστι, μεταληπτέον, μὴ
μέν τοι ἐπαχθὴς γίνου τοῖς χρωμένοις,
μηδὲ ἐλεγκτικός, μηδὲ πολλαχοῦ τό,
Ὅτι αὐτὸς οὐ χρῇ, παράφερε.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Enchir.</hi>
xxxiii.</note> The feeling of the
Romans is curiously exemplified in the life of Alexander
Severus, who, of all the emperors, was probably the most
energetic in legislating against vice. When appointing a
provincial governor, he was accustomed to provide him with
horses and servants, and, if he was unmarried, with a concubine,
<q>because,</q> as the historian very gravely observes, <q>it
was impossible that he could exist without one.</q><note place='foot'><q>Et si uxores non haberent,
singulas concubinas, quod sine his
esse non possent.</q>&mdash;Lampridius, <hi rend='italic'>A.
Severus</hi>. We have an amusing
picture of the common tone of
people of the world on this matter,
in the speech Apuleius puts into
the mouth of the gods, remonstrating
with Venus for being angry
because her son formed a connection
with Psyche. (<hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> lib. v.)</note>
</p>

<p>
What was written among the Pagans in opposition to
these views was not much, but it is worthy of notice, as
illustrating the tendency that had arisen. Musonius Rufus
distinctly and emphatically asserted that no union of the
sexes other than marriage was permissible.<note place='foot'>Preserved by Stobæus. See
Denis, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Idées morales dans
l'Antiquité</hi>, tome ii. pp. 134-136,
149-150.</note> Dion Chrysostom
desired prostitution to be suppressed by law. The
ascetic notion of the impurity even of marriage may be
faintly traced. Apollonius of Tyana lived, on this ground,
a life of celibacy.<note place='foot'>Philos. <hi rend='italic'>Apol.</hi> i. 13. When a
saying of Pythagoras, <q>that a man
should only have commerce with
his own wife,</q> was quoted, he said
that this concerned others.</note> Zenobia refused to cohabit with her
husband, except so far as was necessary for the production of
an heir.<note place='foot'>Trebellius Pollio, <hi rend='italic'>Zenobia</hi>.</note> Hypatia is said, like many Christian saints, to
have maintained the position of a virgin wife.<note place='foot'>This is asserted by an anonymous
writer quoted by Suidas. See
Ménage, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Mulierum Philosopharum</hi>,
p. 58.</note> The belief
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
in the impurity of all corporeal things, and in the duty
of rising above them, was in the third century strenuously
enforced.<note place='foot'>See, e.g., Plotinus, 1st Eun.
vi. 6.</note> Marcus Aurelius and Julian were both
admirable representatives of the best Pagan spirit of their
time. Each of them lost his wife early, each was eulogised
by his biographer for the virtue he manifested after her
death; but there is a curious and characteristic difference in
the forms which that virtue assumed. Marcus Aurelius, we
are told, did not wish to bring into his house a stepmother to
rule over his children, and accordingly took a concubine.<note place='foot'>Capitolinus, <hi rend='italic'>M. Aurelius</hi>.</note>
Julian ever after lived in perfect continence.<note place='foot'>Amm. Marcell. xxv. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
The foregoing facts, which I have given in the most condensed
form, and almost unaccompanied by criticism or by
comment, will be sufficient, I hope, to exhibit the state of
feeling of the Romans on this subject, and also the direction
in which that feeling was being modified. Those who are
familiar with this order of studies will readily understand
that it is impossible to mark out with precision the chronology
of a moral sentiment; but there can be no question that
in the latter days of the Roman Empire the perceptions of
men on this subject became more subtle and more refined
than they had previously been, and it is equally certain that
the Oriental philosophies which had superseded Stoicism
largely influenced the change. Christianity soon constituted
itself the representative of the new tendency. It regarded
purity as the most important of all virtues, and it strained to
the utmost all the vast agencies it possessed, to enforce it.
In the legislation of the first Christian emperors we find
many traces of a fiery zeal. Panders were condemned to
have molten lead poured down their throats. In the case of
rape, not only the ravisher, but even the injured person, if
she consented to the act, was put to death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. ix. tit. 24.</note> A great service
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
was done to the cause both of purity and of philanthropy, by
a law which permitted actresses, on receiving baptism, to
abandon their profession, which had been made a form of
slavery, and was virtually a slavery to vice.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cod. Theod.</hi> lib. xv. tit. 7.</note> Certain
musical girls, who were accustomed to sing or play at the
banquets of the rich, and who were regarded with extreme
horror by the Fathers, were suppressed, and a very stringent
law forbade the revival of the class.<note place='foot'><q>Fidicinam nulli liceat vel
emere vel docere vel vendere, vel
conviviis aut spectaculis adhibere.
Nec cuiquam aut delectationis desiderio
erudita feminea aut musicæ
artis studio liceat habere mancipia.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cod.
Theod.</hi> xv. 7, 10. This curious
law was issued in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 385. St.
Jerome said these musicians were
the chorus of the devil, and quite
as dangerous as the sirens. See
the comments on the law.</note>
</p>

<p>
Side by side with the civil legislation, the penitential
legislation of the Church was exerted in the same direction.
Sins of unchastity probably occupy a larger place than any
others in its enactments. The cases of unnatural love, and of
mothers who had made their daughters courtesans, were
punished by perpetual exclusion from communion, and a
crowd of minor offences were severely visited. The ascetic
passion increased the prominence of this branch of ethics,
and the imaginations of men were soon fascinated by the
pure and noble figures of the virgin martyrs of the Church,
who on more than one occasion fully equalled the courage of
men, while they sometimes mingled with their heroism traits
of the most exquisite feminine gentleness. For the patient
endurance of excruciating physical suffering, Christianity
produced no more sublime figure than Blandina, the poor
servant-girl who was martyred at Lyons; and it would be
difficult to find in all history a more touching picture of
natural purity than is contained in one simple incident of
the martyrdom of St. Perpetua. It is related of that saint
that she was condemned to be slaughtered by a wild bull,
and, as she fell half dead from its horns upon the sand of the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
arena, it was observed that even in that awful moment her
virgin modesty was supreme, and her first instinctive movement
was to draw together her dress, which had been torn
in the assault.<note place='foot'><p>Ruinart, <hi rend='italic'>Act. S. Perpetuæ</hi>.
These acts, are, I believe, generally
regarded as authentic. There is
nothing more instructive in history
than to trace the same moral feelings
through different ages and religions;
and I am able in this case
to present the reader with an illustration
of their permanence, which
I think somewhat remarkable. The
younger Pliny gives in one of his
letters a pathetic account of the
execution of Cornelia, a vestal
virgin, by the order of Domitian.
She was buried alive for incest;
but her innocence appears to have
been generally believed; and she
had been condemned unheard, and
in her absence. As she was being
lowered into the subterranean cell
her dress was caught and deranged
in the descent. She turned round
and drew it to her, and when the
executioner stretched out his hand
to assist her, she started back lest
he should touch her, for this, according
to the received opinion, was
a pollution; and even in the supreme
moment of her agony her
vestal purity shrank from the unholy
contact. (Plin. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> iv. 11.)
If we now pass back several centuries,
we find Euripides attributing
to Polyxena a trait precisely
similar to that which was attributed
to Perpetua. As she fell
beneath the sword of the executioner,
it was observed that her
last care was that she might fall
with decency.
</p>
<p>
ἡ δὲ και θνήσκουσ᾽ ὅμως πολλὴν πρόνοιαν εἶχεν εὐσχήμως πεσεῖν,<lb/>
κρύπτουσ᾽ ἂ κρύπτειν ὄμματ᾽ ἀρσένων χρεών.
</p>
<p>
Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Hec.</hi> 566-68.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
A crowd of very curious popular legends also arose,
which, though they are for the most part without much
intrinsic excellence, have their importance in history, as
showing the force with which the imaginations of men were
turned in this direction, and the manner in which Christianity
was regarded as the great enemy of the passions of the flesh.
Thus, St. Jerome relates an incredible story of a young
Christian, being, in the Diocletian persecution, bound with
ribands of silk in the midst of a lovely garden, surrounded
by everything that could charm the ear and the eye, while a
beautiful courtesan assailed him with her blandishments,
against which he protected himself by biting out his tongue
and spitting it in her face.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vita Pauli.</hi></note> Legends are recounted of young
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
Christian men assuming the garb and manners of libertines,
that they might obtain access to maidens who had been
condemned to vice, exchanging dresses with them, and thus
enabling them to escape.<note place='foot'>St. Ambrose relates an instance
of this, which he says occurred
at Antioch (<hi rend='italic'>De Virginibus</hi>,
lib. ii. cap. iv.). When the Christian
youth was being led to execution,
the girl whom he had saved
reappeared and died with him.
Eusebius tells a very similar story,
but places the scene at Alexandria.</note> St. Agnes was said to have been
stripped naked before the people, who all turned away their
eyes except one young man, who instantly became blind.<note place='foot'>See Ceillier, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des Auteurs
ecclés.</hi> tome iii. p. 523.</note>
The sister of St. Gregory of Nyssa was afflicted with a cancer
in her breast, but could not bear that a surgeon should see it,
and was rewarded for her modesty by a miraculous cure.<note place='foot'>Ibid. tome viii. pp. 204-207.</note>
To the fabled zone of beauty the Christian saints opposed
their zones of chastity, which extinguished the passion of the
wearer, or would only meet around the pure.<note place='foot'>Among the Irish saints St.
Colman is said to have had a girdle
which would only meet around the
chaste, and which was long preserved
in Ireland as a relic (Colgan,
<hi rend='italic'>Acta Sanctorum Hiberniæ</hi>, Louvain,
1645, vol. i. p. 246); and St.
Fursæus a girdle that extinguished
lust. (Ibid. p. 292.) The girdle
of St. Thomas Aquinas seems to
have had some miraculous properties
of this kind. (See his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi> in
the Bollandists, Sept. 29.) Among
both the Greeks and Romans it was
customary for the bride to be girt
with a girdle which the bridegroom
unloosed in the nuptial bed, and
hence <q>zonam solvere</q> became a
proverbial expression for <q>pudicitiam
mulieris imminuere.</q> (Nieupoort,
<hi rend='italic'>De Ritibus Romanorum</hi>, p.
479; Alexander's <hi rend='italic'>History of Women</hi>,
vol. ii. p. 300.)</note> Dæmons
were said not unfrequently to have entered into the profligate.
The garment of a girl who was possessed was brought
to St. Pachomius, and he discovered from it that she had a
lover.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vit. St. Pachom.</hi> (Rosweyde).</note> A courtesan accused St. Gregory Thaumaturgus of
having been her lover, and having refused to pay her what
he had promised. He paid the required sum, but she was
immediately possessed by a daemon.<note place='foot'>See his <hi rend='italic'>Life</hi>, by Gregory of
Nyssa.</note> The efforts of the
saints to reclaim courtesans from the path of vice created
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
a large class of legends. St. Mary Magdalene, St. Mary of
Egypt, St. Afra, St. Pelagia, St. Thais, and St. Theodota, in
the early Church, as well as St. Marguerite of Cortona, and
Clara of Rimini, in the middle ages, had been courtesans.<note place='foot'>A little book has been written
on these legends by M. Charles
de Bussy, called <hi rend='italic'>Les Courtisanes
saintes</hi>. There is said to be some
doubt about St. Afra, for, while her
acts represent her as a reformed
courtesan, St. Fortunatus, in two
lines he has devoted to her, calls
her a virgin. (Ozanam, <hi rend='italic'>Études
german.</hi> tome ii. p. 8.)</note>
St. Vitalius, it is said, was accustomed every night to visit
the dens of vice in his neighbourhood, to give the inmates
money to remain without sin for that night, and to offer up
prayers for their conversion.<note place='foot'>See the <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Sancti Joannis
Eleemosynarii</hi> (Rosweyde).</note> It is related of St. Serapion,
that, as he was passing through a village in Egypt, a courtesan
beckoned to him. He promised at a certain hour to visit
her. He kept his appointment, but declared that there was
a duty which his order imposed on him. He fell down on
his knees and began repeating the Psalter, concluding every
psalm with a prayer for his hostess. The strangeness of the
scene, and the solemnity of his tone and manner, overawed
and fascinated her. Gradually her tears began to flow.
She knelt beside him and began to join in his prayers. He
heeded her not, but hour after hour continued in the same
stern and solemn voice, without rest and without interruption,
to repeat his alternate prayers and psalms, till her repentance
rose to a paroxysm of terror, and, as the grey morning
streaks began to illumine the horizon, she fell half dead at
his feet, imploring him with broken sobs to lead her anywhere
where she might expiate the sins of her past.<note place='foot'>Tillemont, tome x. pp. 61-62.
There is also a very picturesque
legend of the manner in which St.
Paphnutius converted the courtesan
Thais.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the services rendered by the ascetics in imprinting
on the minds of men a profound and enduring conviction of
the importance of chastity, though extremely great, were
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
seriously counterbalanced by their noxious influence upon
marriage. Two or three beautiful descriptions of this
institution have been culled out of the immense mass of the
patristic writings;<note place='foot'>See especially, Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>Ad
Uxorem</hi>. It was beautifully said,
at a later period, that woman was
not taken from the head of man,
for she was not intended to be his
ruler, nor from his feet, for she
was not intended to be his slave,
but from his side, for she was to
be his companion and his comfort.
(Peter Lombard, <hi rend='italic'>Senten.</hi> lib. ii.
dis. 18.)</note> but, in general, it would be difficult to
conceive anything more coarse or more repulsive than the
manner in which they regarded it.<note place='foot'>The reader may find many
passages on this subject in Barbeyrac,
<hi rend='italic'>Morale des Pères</hi>, ii. § 7;
iii. § 8; iv. § 31-35; vi. § 31;
xiii. § 2-8.</note> The relation which
nature has designed for the noble purpose of repairing the
ravages of death, and which, as Linnæus has shown, extends
even through the world of flowers, was invariably treated as
a consequence of the fall of Adam, and marriage was regarded
almost exclusively in its lowest aspect. The tender love
which it elicits, the holy and beautiful domestic qualities
that follow in its train, were almost absolutely omitted from
consideration.<note place='foot'><q>It is remarkable how rarely,
if ever (I cannot call to mind an
instance), in the discussions of the
comparative merits of marriage
and celibacy, the social advantages
appear to have occurred to the
mind.... It is always argued
with relation to the interests and
the perfection of the individual
soul; and, even with regard to that,
the writers seem almost unconscious
of the softening and humanising
effect of the natural affections, the
beauty of parental tenderness and
filial love.</q>&mdash;Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of
Christianity</hi>, vol. iii. p. 196.</note> The object of the ascetic was to attract men
to a life of virginity, and, as a necessary consequence, marriage
was treated as an inferior state. It was regarded as being
necessary, indeed, and therefore justifiable, for the propagation
of the species, and to free men from greater evils;
but still as a condition of degradation from which all who
aspired to real sanctity should fly. To <q>cut down by the axe
of Virginity the wood of Marriage,</q> was, in the energetic
language of St. Jerome, the end of the saint;<note place='foot'><q>Tempus breve est, et jam
securis ad radices arborum posita
est, quæ silvam legis et nuptiarum
evangelica castitate succidat.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
cxxiii.</note> and if he
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
consented to praise marriage, it was merely because it
produced virgins.<note place='foot'><q>Laudo nuptias, laudo conjugium,
sed quia mihi virgines
generant.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> xxii.</note> Even when the bond had been formed,
the ascetic passion retained its sting. We have already seen
how it embittered other relations of domestic life. Into this,
the holiest of all, it infused a tenfold bitterness. Whenever
any strong religious fervour fell upon a husband or a wife, its
first effect was to make a happy union impossible. The more
religious partner immediately desired to live a life of solitary
asceticism, or at least, if no ostensible separation took place,
an unnatural life of separation in marriage. The immense
place this order of ideas occupies in the hortatory writings of
the Fathers, and in the legends of the saints, must be familiar
to all who have any knowledge of this department of
literature. Thus&mdash;to give but a very few examples&mdash;St.
Nilus, when he had already two children, was seized with
a longing for the prevailing asceticism, and his wife was
persuaded, after many tears, to consent to their separation.<note place='foot'>See Ceillier, <hi rend='italic'>Auteurs ecclés.</hi>
xiii. p. 147.</note>
St. Ammon, on the night of his marriage, proceeded to greet
his bride with an harangue upon the evils of the married
state, and they agreed, in consequence, at once to separate.<note place='foot'>Socrates, iv. 23.</note>
St. Melania laboured long and earnestly to induce her
husband to allow her to desert his bed, before he would
consent.<note place='foot'>Palladius, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Laus.</hi> cxix.</note> St. Abraham ran away from his wife on the night
of his marriage.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Vit. S. Abr.</hi> (Rosweyde), cap. i.</note> St. Alexis, according to a somewhat later
legend, took the same step, but many years after returned
from Jerusalem to his father's house, in which his wife was
still lamenting her desertion, begged and received a lodging
as an act of charity, and lived there unrecognised and
unknown till his death.<note place='foot'>I do not know when this legend
first appeared. M. Littré mentions
having found it in a French MS. of
the eleventh century (Littré, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Barbares</hi>, pp. 123-124); and it also
forms the subject of a very curious
fresco, I imagine of a somewhat
earlier date, which was discovered,
within the last few years, in the
subterranean church of St. Clement
at Rome. An account of it is given
by Father Mullooly, in his interesting
little book about that Church.</note> St. Gregory of Nyssa&mdash;who was
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
so unfortunate as to be married&mdash;wrote a glowing eulogy of
virginity, in the course of which he mournfully observed
that this privileged state could never be his. He resembled,
he assures us, an ox that was ploughing a field, the fruit of
which he must never enjoy; or a thirsty man, who was
gazing on a stream of which he never can drink; or a poor
man, whose poverty seems the more bitter as he contemplates
the wealth of his neighbours; and he proceeded to descant in
feeling terms upon the troubles of matrimony.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Virgin.</hi> cap. iii.</note> Nominal
marriages, in which the partners agreed to shun the marriage
bed, became not uncommon. The emperor Henry II.,
Edward the Confessor, of England, and Alphonso II., of
Spain, gave examples of it. A very famous and rather
picturesque history of this kind is related by Gregory of
Tours. A rich young Gaul, named Injuriosus, led to his
home a young bride to whom he was passionately attached.
That night, she confessed to him, with tears, that she had
vowed to keep her virginity, and that she regretted bitterly
the marriage into which her love for him had betrayed her.
He told her that they should remain united, but that she
should still observe her vow; and he fulfilled his promise.
When, after several years, she died, her husband, in laying
her in the tomb, declared, with great solemnity, that he
restored her to God as immaculate as he had received her;
and then a smile lit up the face of the dead woman, and she
said, <q>Why do you tell that which no one asked you?</q>
The husband soon afterwards died, and his corpse, which had
been laid in a distinct compartment from that of his wife in
the tomb, was placed side by side with it by the angels.<note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. i. 42.</note>
</p>

<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>

<p>
The extreme disorders which such teaching produced in
domestic life, and also the extravagances which grew up
among some heretics, naturally alarmed the more judicious
leaders of the Church, and it was ordained that married
persons should not enter into an ascetic life, except by
mutual consent.<note place='foot'>The regulations on this point
are given at length in Bingham.</note> The ascetic ideal, however, remained
unchanged. To abstain from marriage, or in marriage to
abstain from a perfect union, was regarded as a proof of
sanctity, and marriage was viewed in its coarsest and most
degraded form. The notion of its impurity took many
forms, and exercised for some centuries an extremely wide
influence over the Church. Thus, it was the custom during
the middle ages to abstain from the marriage bed during the
night after the ceremony, in honour of the sacrament.<note place='foot'>Muratori, <hi rend='italic'>Antich. Ital.</hi> diss. xx.</note> It
was expressly enjoined that no married persons should participate
in any of the great Church festivals if the night
before they had lain together, and St. Gregory the Great
tells of a young wife who was possessed by a dæmon, because
she had taken part in a procession of St. Sebastian,
without fulfilling this condition.<note place='foot'>St. Greg. <hi rend='italic'>Dial.</hi> i. 10.</note> The extent to which the
feeling on the subject was carried is shown by the famous
vision of Alberic in the twelfth century, in which a special
place of torture, consisting of a lake of mingled lead, pitch,
and resin is represented as existing in hell for the punishment
of married people who had lain together on Church
festivals or fast days.<note place='foot'>Delepierre, <hi rend='italic'>L'Enfer décrit par
ceux qui l'ont vu</hi>, pp. 44-56.</note>
</p>

<p>
Two other consequences of this way of regarding marriage
were a very strong disapproval of second marriages, and a
very strong desire to secure celibacy in the clergy. The first
of these notions had existed, though in a very different form,
and connected with very different motives, among the early
Romans, who were accustomed, we are told, to honour with
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
the crown of modesty those who were content with one marriage,
and to regard many marriages as a sign of illegitimate
intemperance.<note place='foot'>Val. Max. ii. 1. § 3.</note> This opinion appears to have chiefly grown
out of a very delicate and touching feeling which had taken
deep root in the Roman mind, that the affection a wife owes
her husband is so profound and so pure that it must not
cease even with his death; that it should guide and consecrate
all her subsequent life, and that it never can be transferred
to another object. Virgil, in very beautiful lines,
puts this sentiment into the mouth of Dido;<note place='foot'><p><q>Ille meos, primus qui me sibi junxit, amores<lb/>
Abstulit; ille habeat secum, servetque sepulchro.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Æn.</hi> iv. 28.
</p></note> and several
examples are recorded of Roman wives, sometimes in the
prime of youth and beauty, upon the death of their husbands,
devoting the remainder of their lives to retirement and to the
memory of the dead.<note place='foot'>E.g., the wives of Lucan, Drusus,
and Pompey.</note> Tacitus held up the Germans as in
this respect a model to his countrymen,<note place='foot'>Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>German.</hi> xix.</note> and the epithet
<q>univiræ</q> inscribed on many Roman tombs shows how this
devotion was practised and valued.<note place='foot'>Friedländer, tome i. p. 411.</note> The family of Camillus
was especially honoured for the absence of second marriages
among its members.<note place='foot'>Hieron. <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> liv.</note> <q>To love a wife when living,</q> said one
of the latest Roman poets, <q>is a pleasure; to love her when
dead is an act of religion.</q><note place='foot'><p>
<q>Uxorem vivam amare voluptas;<lb/>
Defunctam religio.</q>
</p>
<p>
Statius. <hi rend='italic'>Sylv.</hi> v. in proœmio.
</p></note> In the case of men, the propriety
of abstaining from second marriages was probably not felt so
strongly as in the case of women, and what feeling on the
subject existed was chiefly due to another motive&mdash;affection
for the children, whose interests, it was thought, might be
injured by a stepmother.<note place='foot'>By one of the laws of Charondas
it was ordained that those
who cared so little for the happiness
of their children as to place a
stepmother over them, should be
excluded from the councils of the
State. (Diod. Sic. xii. 12.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>

<p>
The sentiment which thus recoiled from second marriages
passed with a vastly increased strength into ascetic Christianity,
but it was based upon altogether different grounds.
We find, in the first place, that an affectionate remembrance
of the husband had altogether vanished from the motives of the
abstinence. In the next place, we may remark that the ecclesiastical
writers, in perfect conformity with the extreme coarseness
of their views about the sexes, almost invariably assumed
that the motive to second or third marriages must be simply
the force of the animal passions. The Montanists and the
Novatians absolutely condemned second marriages.<note place='foot'>Tertullian expounded the
Montanist view in his treatise,
<hi rend='italic'>De Monogamia</hi>.</note> The
orthodox pronounced them lawful, on account of the weakness
of human nature, but they viewed them with the most
emphatic disapproval,<note place='foot'>A full collection of the statements
of the Fathers on this subject
is given by Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>De Matrimonio</hi>,
lib. iii. Sect. I.; and by
Natalis Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>
Sæc. II. dissert. 18.</note> partly because they considered them
manifest signs of incontinence, and partly because they regarded
them as inconsistent with their doctrine that marriage
is an emblem of the union of Christ with the Church.
The language of the Fathers on this subject appears to a
modern mind most extraordinary, and, but for their distinct
and reiterated assertion that they considered these marriages
permissible,<note place='foot'>Thus, to give but a single instance,
St. Jerome, who was one of
their strongest opponents, says:
<q>Quid igitur? damnamus secunda
matrimonia? Minime, sed prima
laudamus. Abjicimus de ecclesia
digamos? absit; sed monogamos
ad continentiam provocamus. In
arca Noe non solum munda sed et
immunda fuerunt animalia.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
cxxiii.</note> would appear to amount to a peremptory condemnation.
Thus&mdash;to give but a few samples&mdash;digamy, or
second marriage, is described by Athenagoras as <q>a decent
adultery.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>In Legat.</hi></note> <q>Fornication,</q> according to Clement of Alexandria,
<q>is a lapse from one marriage into many.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Strom.</hi> lib. iii.</note> <q>The first
Adam,</q> said St. Jerome, <q>had one wife; the second Adam
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
had no wife. They who approve of digamy hold forth a
third Adam, who was twice married, whom they follow.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contra Jovin.</hi> i.</note>
<q>Consider,</q> he again says, <q>that she who has been twice
married, though she be an old, and decrepit, and poor
woman, is not deemed worthy to receive the charity of the
Church. But if the bread of charity is taken from her,
how much more that bread which descends from heaven!</q><note place='foot'>Ibid. See, too, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxiii.</note>
<q>Digamists,</q> according to Origen, <q>are saved in the name of
Christ, but are by no means crowned by him.</q><note place='foot'>Hom. xvii. in Luc.</note> <q>By this
text,</q> said St. Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of St. Paul's
comparison of marriage to the union of Christ with the
Church, <q>second marriages seem to me to be reproved. If
there are two Christs there may be two husbands or two
wives. If there is but one Christ, one Head of the Church,
there is but one flesh&mdash;a second is repelled. But if he forbids
a second, what is to be said of third marriages? The
first is law, the second is pardon and indulgence, the third is
iniquity; but he who exceeds this number is manifestly
bestial.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> xxxi.</note> Digamists were excluded from the priesthood
and from the distributions of Church charity; a period of
penance was imposed on them before they were admitted
to communion,<note place='foot'>Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>De Matr.</hi> iii. § 1, art.
1; Natalis Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>
II. dissert. 18. The penances are
said not to imply that the second
marriage was a sin, but that the
moral condition that made it necessary
was a bad one.</note> and two English statutes of the Middle
Ages withheld the benefit of clergy from any prisoner who
had <q>married two wives or one widow.</q><note place='foot'>See Stephen's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of English
Criminal Law</hi>, i. p. 461.</note> The Council of
Illiberis, in the beginning of the fourth century, while in
general condemning baptism by laymen, permitted it in case
of extreme necessity; but provided that even in that case
the officiating layman must not have been twice married.<note place='foot'>Conc. Illib. can. xxxviii.
Bingham thinks the feeling of the
Council to have been, that if baptism was not administered by a
priest, it should at all events be
administered by one who might
have been a priest.</note>
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
Among the Greeks fourth marriages were at one time
deemed absolutely unlawful, and much controversy was
excited by the Emperor Leo the Wise, who, having had
three wives, had taken a mistress, but afterwards, in defiance
of the religious feelings of his people, determined to raise her
to the position of a wife.<note place='foot'>Perrone, <hi rend='italic'>De Matrimonio</hi>, tome
iii. p. 102.</note>
</p>

<p>
The subject of the celibacy of the clergy, in which the
ecclesiastical feelings about marriage were also shown, is an
extremely large one, and I shall not attempt to deal with it,
except in a most cursory manner.<note place='foot'>This subject has recently been
treated with very great learning
and with admirable impartiality
by an American author, Mr. Henry
C. Lea, in his <hi rend='italic'>History of Sacerdotal
Celibacy</hi> (Philadelphia, 1867), which
is certainly one of the most valuable
works that America has produced.
Since the great history of
Dean Milman, I know no work in
English which has thrown more
light on the moral condition of the
middle ages, and none which is
more fitted to dispel the gross illusions
concerning that period which
High Church writers, and writers
of the positive school, have conspired
to sustain.</note> There are two facts connected
with it which every candid student must admit. The
first is, that in the earliest period of the Church, the privilege
of marriage was accorded to the clergy. The second is,
that a notion of the impurity of marriage existed, and that it
was felt that the clergy, as pre-eminently the holy class,
should have less licence than laymen. The first form this
feeling took appears in the strong conviction that a second
marriage of a priest, or the marriage of a priest with a
widow, was unlawful and criminal.<note place='foot'>See Lea, p. 36. The command
of St. Paul, that a bishop or deacon
should be the husband of <emph>one</emph> wife
(1 Tim. iii. 2-12) was believed by
all ancient and by many modern
commentators to be prohibitory of
second marriages; and this view is
somewhat confirmed by the widows
who were to be honoured and supported
by the Church, being only
those who had been but once married
(1 Tim. v. 9). See Pressensé,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. des trois premiers Siècles</hi> (1<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>re</hi>
série), tome ii. p. 233. Among the
Jews it was ordained that the high
priest should not marry a widow.
(Levit. xxi. 13-14.)</note> This belief seems to
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
have existed from the earliest period of the Church, and was
retained with great tenacity and unanimity through many
centuries. In the next place, we find from an extremely
early date an opinion, that it was an act of virtue, at a later
period that it was an act of duty, for priests after ordination
to abstain from cohabiting with their wives. The Council
of Nice refrained, by the advice of Paphnutius, who was
himself a scrupulous celibate, from imposing this last rule as
a matter of necessity;<note place='foot'>Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>H. E.</hi> i. 11. The
Council of Illiberis (can. xxxiii.)
had ordained this, but both the
precepts and the practice of divines
varied greatly. A brilliant summary
of the chief facts is given in
Milman's <hi rend='italic'>History of Early Christianity</hi>,
vol. iii. pp. 277-282.</note> but in the course of the fourth century
it was a recognised principle that clerical marriages were
criminal. They were celebrated, however, habitually, and
usually with the greatest openness. The various attitudes
assumed by the ecclesiastical authorities in dealing with this
subject form an extremely curious page of the history of
morals, and supply the most crushing evidence of the evils
which have been produced by the system of celibacy. I can
at present, however, only refer to the vast mass of evidence
which has been collected on the subject, derived from the
writings of Catholic divines and from the decrees of Catholic
Councils during the space of many centuries. It is a popular
illusion, which is especially common among writers who have
little direct knowledge of the middle ages, that the atrocious
immorality of monasteries, in the century before the Reformation,
was a new fact, and that the ages when the faith of
men was undisturbed, were ages of great moral purity. In
fact, it appears, from the uniform testimony of the ecclesiastical
writers, that ecclesiastical immorality in the eighth
and three following centuries was little if at all less outrageous
than in any other period, while the Papacy, during
almost the whole of the tenth century, was held by men of
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
infamous lives. Simony was nearly universal.<note place='foot'>See, on the state of things in
the tenth and eleventh centuries,
Lea, pp. 162-192.</note> Barbarian
chieftains married at an early age, and totally incapable of
restraint, occupied the leading positions in the Church, and
gross irregularities speedily became general. An Italian
bishop of the tenth century epigrammatically described the
morals of his time, when he declared, that if he were to
enforce the canons against unchaste people administering
ecclesiastical rites, no one would be left in the Church except
the boys; and if he were to observe the canons against bastards,
these also must be excluded.<note place='foot'>Ratherius, quoted by Lea, p.
151.</note> The evil acquired such
magnitude that a great feudal clergy, bequeathing the ecclesiastical
benefices from father to son, appeared more than
once likely to arise.<note place='foot'>See some curious evidence of
the extent to which the practice of
the hereditary transmission of ecclesiastical
offices was carried, in Lea,
pp. 149, 150, 266, 299, 339.</note> A tax called <q>Culagium,</q> which was in
fact a licence to clergymen to keep concubines, was during
several centuries systematically levied by princes.<note place='foot'>Lea, pp. 271, 292, 422.</note> Sometimes
the evil, by its very extension, corrected itself. Priestly
marriages were looked upon as normal events not implying
any guilt, and in the eleventh century several instances are
recorded in which they were not regarded as any impediment
to the power of working miracles.<note place='foot'>Ibid. pp. 186-187.</note> But this was a
rare exception. From the earliest period a long succession
of Councils as well as such men as St. Boniface, St. Gregory
the Great, St. Peter Damiani, St. Dunstan, St. Anselm,
Hildebrand and his successors in the Popedom, denounced
priestly marriage or concubinage as an atrocious crime, and
the habitual life of the priests was, in theory at least, generally
recognised as a life of sin.
</p>

<p>
It is not surprising that, having once broken their vows
and begun to live what they deemed a life of habitual sin,
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
the clergy should soon have sunk far below the level of the
laity. We may not lay much stress on such isolated instances
of depravity as that of Pope John XXIII., who was condemned
among many other crimes for incest, and for adultery;<note place='foot'>Lea, p. 358.</note>
or the abbot-elect of St. Augustine, at Canterbury, who
in 1171 was found, on investigation, to have seventeen
illegitimate children in a single village;<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 296.</note> or an abbot of St.
Pelayo, in Spain, who in 1130 was proved to have kept no
less than seventy concubines;<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 322.</note> or Henry III., Bishop of
Liège, who was deposed in 1274 for having sixty-five
illegitimate children;<note place='foot'>Ibid. p. 349.</note> but it is impossible to resist the
evidence of a long chain of Councils and ecclesiastical writers,
who conspire in depicting far greater evils than simple concubinage.
It was observed that when the priests actually took
wives the knowledge that these connections were illegal was
peculiarly fatal to their fidelity, and bigamy and extreme
mobility of attachments were especially common among
them. The writers of the middle ages are full of accounts of
nunneries that were like brothels, of the vast multitude of
infanticides within their walls, and of that inveterate
prevalence of incest among the clergy, which rendered it
necessary again and again to issue the most stringent enactments
that priests should not be permitted to live with their
mothers or sisters. Unnatural love, which it had been one
of the great services of Christianity almost to eradicate from
the world, is more than once spoken of as lingering in the
monasteries; and, shortly before the Reformation, complaints
became loud and frequent of the employment of the confessional
for the purposes of debauchery.<note place='foot'>The reader may find the most
ample evidence of these positions
in Lea. See especially pp. 138,
141, 153, 155, 260, 344.</note> The measures
taken on the subject were very numerous and severe. At
first, the evil chiefly complained of was the clandestine
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
marriage of priests, and especially their intercourse with
wives whom they had married previous to their ordination.
Several Councils issued their anathemas against priests <q>who
had improper relations with their wives;</q> and rules were
made that priests should always sleep in the presence of a
subordinate clerk; and that they should only meet their
wives in the open air and before at least two witnesses. Men
were, however, by no means unanimous in their way of
regarding this matter. Synesius, when elected to a bishopric,
at first declined, boldly alleging as one of his reasons, that
he had a wife whom he loved dearly, and who, he hoped,
would bear him many sons, and that he did not mean to
separate from her or visit her secretly as an adulterer.<note place='foot'>Synesius, <hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cv.</note> A
Bishop of Laon, at a later date, who was married to a niece
of St. Rémy, and who remained with his wife till after he
had a son and a daughter, quaintly expressed his penitence
by naming them respectively Latro and Vulpecula.<note place='foot'>Lea, p. 122. St. Augustine
had named <emph>his</emph> illegitimate son
Adeodatus, or the Gift of God, and
had made him a principal interlocutor
in one of his religious dialogues.</note> St.
Gregory the Great describes the virtue of a priest, who,
through motives of piety, had discarded his wife. As he lay
dying, she hastened to him to watch the bed which for forty
years she had not been allowed to share, and, bending over
what seemed the inanimate form of her husband, she tried to
ascertain whether any breath still remained, when the dying
saint, collecting his last energies, exclaimed, <q>Woman, begone;
take away the straw; there is fire yet.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dialog.</hi> iv. 11.</note> The
destruction of priestly marriage is chiefly due to Hildebrand,
who pursued this object with the most untiring resolution.
Finding that his appeals to the ecclesiastical authorities and
to the civil rulers were insufficient, he boldly turned to the
people, exhorted them, in defiance of all Church traditions,
to withdraw their obedience from married priests, and
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
kindled among them a fierce fanaticism of asceticism, which
speedily produced a fierce persecution of the offending pastors.
Their wives, in immense numbers, were driven forth with
hatred and with scorn; and many crimes, and much intolerable
suffering, followed the disruption. The priests
sometimes strenuously resisted. At Cambrai, in <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 1077,
they burnt alive as a heretic a zealot who was maintaining
the doctrines of Hildebrand. In England, half a century
later, they succeeded in surprising a Papal legate in the arms
of a courtesan, a few hours after he had delivered a fierce
denunciation of clerical unchastity.<note place='foot'>This is mentioned by Henry
of Huntingdon, who was a contemporary.
(Lea, p. 293.)</note> But Papal resolution
supported by popular fanaticism won the victory. Pope
Urban II. gave licence to the nobles to reduce to slavery
the wives whom priests had obstinately refused to abandon,
and after a few more acts of severity priestly marriage became
obsolete. The extent, however, of the disorders that
still existed, is shown by the mournful confessions of
ecclesiastical writers, by the uniform and indignant testimony
of the poets and prose satirists who preceded the
Reformation, by the atrocious immoralities disclosed in the
monasteries at the time of their suppression, and by the
significant prudence of many lay Catholics, who were accustomed
to insist that their priest should take a concubine
for the protection of the families of his parishioners.<note place='foot'>The first notice of this very
remarkable precaution is in a canon
of the Council of Palencia (in
Spain) held in 1322, which anathematises
laymen who compel their
pastors to take concubines. (Lea,
p. 324.) Sleidan mentions that it
was customary in some of the Swiss
cantons for the parishioners to
oblige the priest to select a concubine
as a necessary precaution for
the protection of his female parishioners.
(Ibid. p. 355.) Sarpi, in
his <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Council of Trent</hi>,
mentions (on the authority of
Zuinglius) this Swiss custom.
Nicolas of Clemangis, a leading
member of the Council of Constance,
declared that this custom
had become very common, that
the laity were firmly persuaded
that priests <emph>never</emph> lived a life of
real celibacy, and that, where
no proofs of concubinage were
found, they always assumed the
existence of more serious vice.
The passage (which is quoted
by Bayle) is too remarkable to
be omitted. <q>Taceo de fornicationibus
et adulteriis a quibus qui
alieni sunt probro cæteris ac ludibrio
esse solent, spadonesque aut
sodomitæ appellantur; denique
laici usque adeo persuasum habent
nullos cælibes esse, ut in plerisque
parochiis non aliter velint presbyterum
tolerare nisi concubinam
habeat, quo vel sic suis sit consultum
uxoribus, quæ nec sic quidem
usquequaque sunt extra periculum.</q>
Nic. de Clem. <hi rend='italic'>De Præsul. Simoniac.</hi>
(Lea, p. 386.)</note>
</p>

<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>

<p>
It is scarcely possible to conceive a more demoralising
influence than a priesthood living such a life as I have described.
In Protestant countries, where the marriage of the
clergy is fully recognised, it has, indeed, been productive of
the greatest and the most unequivocal benefits. Nowhere,
it may be confidently asserted, does Christianity assume a more
beneficial or a more winning form than in those gentle clerical
households which stud our land, constituting, as Coleridge said,
<q>the one idyll of modern life,</q> the most perfect type of domestic
peace, the centre of civilisation in the remotest village. Notwithstanding
some class narrowness and professional bigotry,
notwithstanding some unworthy, but half unconscious
mannerism, which is often most unjustly stigmatised as
hypocrisy, it would be difficult to find in any other quarter
so much happiness at once diffused and enjoyed, or so much
virtue attained with so little tension or struggle. Combining
with his sacred calling a warm sympathy with the
intellectual, social, and political movements of his time,
possessing the enlarged practical knowledge of a father of a
family, and entering with a keen zest into the occupations
and the amusements of his parishioners, a good clergyman will
rarely obtrude his religious convictions into secular spheres,
but yet will make them apparent in all. They will be revealed
by a higher and deeper moral tone, by a more
scrupulous purity in word and action, by an all-pervasive
gentleness, which refines, and softens, and mellows, and adds
as much to the charm as to the excellence of the character
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
in which it is displayed. In visiting the sick, relieving the
poor, instructing the young, and discharging a thousand
delicate offices for which a woman's tact is especially needed,
his wife finds a sphere of labour which is at once intensely
active and intensely feminine, and her example is not less
beneficial than her ministrations.
</p>

<p>
Among the Catholic priesthood, on the other hand,
where the vow of celibacy is faithfully observed, a character
of a different type is formed, which with very grave and
deadly faults combines some of the noblest excellences to
which humanity can attain. Separated from most of the ties
and affections of earth, viewing life chiefly through the
distorted medium of the casuist or the confessional, and
deprived of those relationships which more than any others
soften and expand the character, the Catholic priests have
been but too often conspicuous for their fierce and sanguinary
fanaticism, and for their indifference to all interests except
those of their Church; while the narrow range of their
sympathies, and the intellectual servitude they have accepted,
render them peculiarly unfitted for the office of educating the
young, which they so persistently claim, and which, to the
great misfortune of the world, they were long permitted to
monopolise. But, on the other hand, no other body of men
have ever exhibited a more single-minded and unworldly
zeal, refracted by no personal interests, sacrificing to duty
the dearest of earthly objects, and confronting with undaunted
heroism every form of hardship, of suffering, and
of death.
</p>

<p>
That the middle ages, even in their darkest periods, produced
many good and great men of the latter type it would
be unjust and absurd to deny. It can hardly, however, be
questioned that the extreme frequency of illicit connections
among the clergy tended during many centuries most actively
to lower the moral tone of the laity, and to counteract the
great services in the cause of purity which Christian teaching
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
had undoubtedly effected. The priestly connections were
rarely so fully recognised as to enable the mistress to fill a
position like that which is now occupied by the wife of a
clergyman, and the spectacle of the chief teachers and
exemplars of morals living habitually in an intercourse
which was acknowledged to be ambiguous or wrong, must
have acted most injuriously upon every class of the community.
Asceticism, proclaiming war upon human nature,
produced a revulsion towards its extreme opposite, and even
when it was observed it was frequently detrimental to
purity of mind. The habit of continually looking upon marriage
in its coarsest light, and of regarding the propagation
of the species as its one legitimate end, exercised a peculiarly
perverting influence upon the imagination. The exuberant
piety of wives who desired to live apart from their
husbands often drove the latter into serious irregularities.<note place='foot'>This was energetically noticed
by Luther, in his famous sermon
<q>De Matrimonio,</q> and some of the
Catholic preachers of an earlier
period had made the same complaint.
See a curious passage
from a contemporary of Boccaccio,
quoted by Meray, <hi rend='italic'>Les Libres prêcheurs</hi>,
p. 155. <q>Vast numbers of
laymen separated from their wives
under the influence of the ascetic
enthusiasm which Hildebrand created.</q>&mdash;Lea,
p. 254.</note>
The notion of sin was introduced into the dearest of relationships,<note place='foot'><q>Quando enim servata fide
thori causa prolis conjuges conveniunt
sic excusatur coitus ut
culpam non habeat. Quando vero
deficiente bono prolis fide tamen
servata conveniunt causa incontinentiæ
non sic excusatur ut non
habeat culpam, sed venialem....
Item hoc quod conjugati victi concupiscentia
utuntur invicem, ultra
necessitatem liberos procreandi,
ponam in his pro quibus quotidie
dicimus Dimitte nobis debita nostra....
Unde in sententiolis
Sexti Pythagorici legitur <q>omnis
ardentior amator propriæ uxoris
adulter est.</q></q>&mdash;Peter Lombard,
<hi rend='italic'>Sentent.</hi> lib. iv. dist. 31.</note>
and the whole subject was distorted and degraded.
It is one of the great benefits of Protestantism
that it did much to banish these modes of thought and
feeling from the world, and to restore marriage to its simplicity
and its dignity. We have a gratifying illustration
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
of the extent to which an old superstition has declined, in
the fact that when Goldsmith, in his great romance, desired
to depict the harmless eccentricities of his simple-minded and
unworldly vicar, he represented him as maintaining that
opinion concerning the sinfulness of the second marriage of a
clergyman which was for many centuries universal in the
Church.
</p>

<p>
Another injurious consequence, resulting, in a great
measure, from asceticism, was a tendency to depreciate
extremely the character and the position of women. In
this tendency we may detect in part the influence of the
earlier Jewish writings, in which an impartial observer
may find evident traces of the common Oriental depreciation
of women. The custom of purchase-money to the
father of the bride was admitted. Polygamy was authorised,<note place='foot'>Many wives, however, were
forbidden. (Deut. xvii. 17.)
Polygamy is said to have ceased
among the Jews after the return
from the Babylonish captivity.&mdash;Whewell's
<hi rend='italic'>Elements of Morality</hi>,
book iv. ch. v.</note>
and practised by the wisest man on an enormous
scale. A woman was regarded as the origin of human ills.
A period of purification was appointed after the birth of
every child; but, by a very significant provision, it was
twice as long in the case of a female as of a male child.<note place='foot'>Levit. xii. 1-5.</note>
<q>The badness of men,</q> a Jewish writer emphatically declared,
<q>is better than the goodness of women.</q><note place='foot'>Ecclesiasticus, xiii. 14. I
believe, however, the passage has
been translated <q>Better the badness
of a man than the blandishments
of a woman.</q></note> The types of
female excellence exhibited in the early period of Jewish
history are in general of a low order, and certainly far
inferior to those of Roman history or Greek poetry; and the
warmest eulogy of a woman in the Old Testament is
probably that which was bestowed upon her who, with circumstances
of the most aggravated treachery, had murdered
the sleeping fugitive who had taken refuge under her roof.
</p>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<p>
The combined influence of the Jewish writings, and of
that ascetic feeling which treated women as the chief source
of temptation to man, was shown in those fierce invectives,
which form so conspicuous and so grotesque a portion of the
writings of the Fathers, and which contrast so curiously with
the adulation bestowed upon particular members of the sex.
Woman was represented as the door of hell, as the mother of
all human ills. She should be ashamed at the very thought
that she is a woman. She should live in continual penance,
on account of the curses she has brought upon the world.
She should be ashamed of her dress, for it is the memorial
of her fall. She should be especially ashamed of her beauty,
for it is the most potent instrument of the dæmon. Physical
beauty was indeed perpetually the theme of ecclesiastical
denunciations, though one singular exception seems to have
been made; for it has been observed that in the middle ages
the personal beauty of bishops was continually noticed upon
their tombs.<note place='foot'>This curious fact is noticed
by Le Blant, <hi rend='italic'>Inscriptions chrétiennes
de la Gaule</hi>, pp. xcvii.-xcviii.</note> Women were even forbidden by a provincial
Council, in the sixth century, on account of their impurity,
to receive the Eucharist into their naked hands.<note place='foot'>See the decree of a Council of
Auxerre (<hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi> 578), can. 36.</note> Their
essentially subordinate position was continually maintained.
</p>

<p>
It is probable that this teaching had its part in determining
the principles of legislation concerning the sex. The
Pagan laws during the Empire had been continually repealing
the old disabilities of women, and the legislative movement
in their favour continued with unabated force from Constantine
to Justinian, and appeared also in some of the early
laws of the barbarians.<note place='foot'>See the last two chapters of
Troplong, <hi rend='italic'>Influences du Christianisme
sur le Droit</hi> (a work, however,
which is written much more in
the spirit of an apologist than in
that of an historian), and Legouvé,
pp. 27-29.</note> But in the whole feudal legislation
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
women were placed in a much lower legal position than in
the Pagan Empire.<note place='foot'>Even in matters not relating
to property, the position of women
in feudalism was a low one. <q>Tout
mari,</q> says Beaumanoir, <q>peut
battre sa femme quand elle ne veut
pas obéir à son commandement, ou
quand elle le maudit, ou quand
elle le dément, pourvu que ce soit
modérément et sans que mort
s'ensuive,</q> quoted by Legouvé, p.
148. Contrast with this the saying
of the elder Cato: <q>A man
who beats his wife or his children
lays impious hands on that which
is most holy and most sacred in
the world.</q>&mdash;Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Marcus
Cato</hi>.</note> In addition to the personal restrictions
which grew necessarily out of the Catholic doctrines concerning
divorce, and concerning the subordination of the weaker sex,
we find numerous and stringent enactments, which rendered it
impossible for women to succeed to any considerable amount
of property, and which almost reduced them to the alternative
of marriage or a nunnery.<note place='foot'>See Legouvé, pp. 29-38;
Maine's <hi rend='italic'>Ancient Law</hi>, pp. 154-159.</note> The complete inferiority
of the sex was continually maintained by the law; and that
generous public opinion which in Rome had frequently
revolted against the injustice done to girls, in depriving
them of the greater part of the inheritance of their fathers,
totally disappeared. Wherever the canon law has been the
basis of legislation, we find laws of succession sacrificing the
interests of daughters and of wives,<note place='foot'><q>No society which preserves
any tincture of Christian institutions
is likely to restore to married
women the personal liberty conferred
on them by the middle
Roman law: but the proprietary
disabilities of married females
stand on quite a different basis
from their personal incapacities,
and it is by keeping alive and consolidating
the former that the expositors
of the canon law have
deeply injured civilisation. There
are many vestiges of a struggle
between the secular and ecclesiastical
principles; but the canon law
nearly everywhere prevailed.</q>&mdash;Maine's
<hi rend='italic'>Ancient Law</hi>, p. 158. I
may observe that the Russian law
was early very favourable to the
proprietary rights of married
women. See a remarkable letter
in the <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the Princess
Daschkaw</hi> (edited by Mrs. Bradford:
London, 1840), vol. ii. p.
404.</note> and a state of public
opinion which has been formed and regulated by these laws;
nor was any serious attempt made to abolish them till the
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
close of the last century. The French revolutionists, though
rejecting the proposal of Siéyès and Condorcet to accord
political emancipation to women, established at least an equal
succession of sons and daughters, and thus initiated a great
reformation of both law and opinion, which sooner or later
must traverse the world.
</p>

<p>
In their efforts to raise the standard of purity, the
Christian teachers derived much assistance from the incursions
and the conquests of the barbarians. The dissolution
of vast retinues of slaves, the suspension of most public
games, and the general impoverishment that followed the
invasions, were all favourable to female virtue; and in this
respect the various tribes of barbarians, however violent and
lawless, were far superior to the more civilised community.
Tacitus, in a very famous work, had long before pourtrayed
in the most flattering colours the purity of the Germans.
Adultery, he said, was very rare among them. The adulteress
was driven from the house with shaven hair, and
beaten ignominiously through the village. Neither youth,
nor beauty, nor wealth could enable a woman who was
known to have sinned to secure a husband. Polygamy was
restricted to the princes, who looked upon a plurality of
wives rather as a badge of dignity than as a gratification of
the passions. Mothers invariably gave suck to their own
children. Infanticide was forbidden. Widows were not
allowed to re-marry. The men feared captivity, much more
for their wives than for themselves; they believed that a
sacred and prophetic gift resided in women; they consulted
them as oracles, and followed their counsels.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Germania</hi>, cap. ix. xviii.-xx.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is generally believed, and it is not improbable, that
Tacitus in this work intended to reprove the dissolute habits
of his fellow-countrymen, and considerably over-coloured the
virtue of the barbarians. Of the substantial justice, however,
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
of his picture we have much evidence. Salvian, who, about
three centuries later, witnessed and described the manners of
the barbarians who had triumphed over the Empire, attested
in the strongest language the contrast which their chastity
presented to the vice of those whom they had subdued.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De Gubernatione Dei.</hi></note> The
Scandinavian mythology abounds in legends exhibiting the
clear sentiment of the heathen tribes on the subject of purity,
and the awful penalties threatened in the next world against
the seducers.<note place='foot'>See, for these legends, Mallet's
<hi rend='italic'>Northern Antiquities</hi>.</note> The barbarian women were accustomed to practise
medicine and to interpret dreams, and they also very
frequently accompanied their husbands to battle, rallied their
broken forces, and even themselves took part in the fight.<note place='foot'>Tacitus, <hi rend='italic'>Germ.</hi> 9; <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iv.
18; Xiphilin. lxxi. 3; Amm.
Marcellinus, xv. 12; Vopiscus,
<hi rend='italic'>Aurelianus</hi>; Floras, iii. 3.</note>
Augustus had discovered that it was useless to keep barbarian
chiefs as hostages, and that the one way of securing
the fidelity of traitors was by taking their wives, for these,
at least, were never sacrificed. Instances of female heroism
are said to have occurred in the conquered nations, which
might rival the most splendid in the Roman annals.
When Marius had vanquished an army of the Teutons, their
wives besought the conqueror to permit them to become the
servants of the Vestal Virgins, in order that their honour, at
least, might be secure in slavery. Their request was refused,
and that night they all perished by their own hands.<note place='foot'>Valer. Max. vi. 1; Hieron.
<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi> cxxiii.</note> A
powerful noble once solicited the hand of a Galatian lady
named Camma, who, faithful to her husband, resisted all his
entreaties. Resolved at any hazard to succeed, he caused her
husband to be assassinated, and when she took refuge in the
temple of Diana, and enrolled herself among the priestesses,
he sent noble after noble to induce her to relent. After
a time, he ventured himself into her presence. She feigned
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
a willingness to yield, but told him it was first necessary to
make a libation to the goddess. She appeared as a priestess
before the altar, bearing in her hand a cup of wine, which
she had poisoned. She drank half of it herself, handed the
remainder to her guilty lover, and when he had drained the
cup to the dregs, burst into a fierce thanksgiving, that she
had been permitted to avenge, and was soon to rejoin, her
murdered husband.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De Mulier. Virt.</hi></note> Another and still more remarkable
instance of conjugal fidelity was furnished by a Gaulish
woman named Epponina. Her husband, Julius Sabinus,
had rebelled against Vespasian; he was conquered, and
might easily have escaped to Germany, but could not bear to
abandon his young wife. He retired to a villa of his own,
concealed himself in subterranean cellars that were below it,
and instructed a freedman to spread the report that he had
committed suicide, while, to account for the disappearance of
his body, he set fire to the villa. Epponina, hearing of the
suicide, for three days lay prostrate on the ground without
eating. At length the freedman came to her, and told her
that the suicide was feigned. She continued her lamentations
by day, but visited her husband by night. She became
with child, but owing, it is said, to an ointment, she succeeded
in concealing her state from her friends. When the
hour of parturition was at hand, she went alone into the
cellar, and without any assistance or attendance was delivered
of twins, whom she brought up underground. For
nine years she fulfilled her task, when Sabinus was discovered,
and, to the lasting disgrace of Vespasian, was
executed, in spite of the supplications of his wife, who
made it her last request that she might be permitted to
die with him.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Amatorius</hi>; Xiphilin.
lxvi. 16; Tacit. <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iv. 67.
The name of this heroic wife is
given in three different forms.</note>
</p>

<p>
The moral purity of the barbarians was of a kind altogether
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
different from that which the ascetic movement
inculcated. It was concentrated exclusively upon marriage.
It showed itself in a noble conjugal fidelity; but it was
little fitted for a life of celibacy, and did not, as we have
seen, prevent excessive disorders among the priesthood. The
practice of polygamy among the barbarian kings was also
for some centuries unchecked, or at least unsuppressed, by
Christianity. The kings Caribert and Chilperic had both
many wives at the same time.<note place='foot'>On the polygamy of the first,
see Greg. Tur. iv. 26; on the
polygamy of Chilperic, Greg. Tur.
iv. 28; v. 14.</note> Clotaire married the sister
of his first wife during the lifetime of the latter, who, on the
intention of the king being announced, is reported to have
said, <q>Let my lord do what seemeth good in his sight, only
let thy servant live in thy favour.</q><note place='foot'>Greg. Tur. iv. 3.</note> Theodebert, whose
general goodness of character is warmly extolled by the
episcopal historian, abandoned his first wife on account of an
atrocious crime which she had committed; took, during her
lifetime, another, to whom he had previously been betrothed;
and upon the death of this second wife, and while the first
was still living, took a third, whom, however, at a later
period he murdered.<note place='foot'>Ibid. iii. 25-27, 36.</note> St. Columbanus was expelled from
Gaul chiefly on account of his denunciations of the polygamy
of King Thierry.<note place='foot'>Fredegarius, xxxvi.</note> Dagobert had three wives, as well as a
multitude of concubines.<note place='foot'>Ibid. lx.</note> Charlemagne himself had at the
same time two wives, and he indulged largely in concubines.<note place='foot'>Eginhardus, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Kar. Mag.</hi>
xviii. Charlemagne had, according
to Eginhard, four wives, but, as
far as I can understand, only two
at the same time.</note>
After this period examples of this nature became
rare. The Popes and the bishops exercised a strict supervision
over domestic morals, and strenuously, and in most
cases successfully, opposed the attempts of kings and nobles
to repudiate their wives.
</p>

<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>

<p>
But, notwithstanding these startling facts, there can be
no doubt that the general purity of the barbarians was from
the first superior to that of the later Romans, and it appears
in many of their laws. It has been very happily observed,<note place='foot'>Smyth's <hi rend='italic'>Lectures on Modern
History</hi>, vol. i. pp. 61-62.</note>
that the high value placed on this virtue is well illustrated
by the fact that in the Salic code, while a charge of cowardice
falsely brought against a man was only punished by a fine
of three solidi, a charge of unchastity falsely brought against
a woman was punished by a fine of forty-five. The Teutonic
sentiment was shown in a very stern legislation against
adultery and rape,<note place='foot'>Milman's <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of Latin
Christianity</hi>, vol. i. p. 363; Legouvé,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Morale des Femmes</hi>,
p. 57.</note> and curiously minute precautions were
sometimes taken to guard against them. A law of the
Spanish Visigoths prohibited surgeons from bleeding any
free woman except in the presence of her husband, of her
nearest relative, or at least of some properly appointed
witness, and a Salic law imposed a fine of fifteen pieces of
gold upon any one who improperly pressed her hand.<note place='foot'>See, on these laws, Lord
Kames <hi rend='italic'>On Women</hi>; Legouvé, p. 57.</note>
</p>

<p>
Under the influence of Christianity, assisted by the barbarians,
a vast change passed gradually over the world. The
vice we are considering was probably more rare; it certainly
assumed less extravagant forms, and it was screened from
observation with a new modesty. The theory of morals had
become clearer, and the practice was somewhat improved.
The extreme grossness of literature had disappeared, and the
more glaring violations of marriage were always censured
and often repressed. The penitential discipline, and the
exhortations of the pulpit, diffused abroad an immeasurably
higher sense of the importance of purity than Pagan antiquity
had known. St. Gregory the Great, following in the
steps of some Pagan philosophers,<note place='foot'>Favorinus had strongly urged
it. (Aul. Gell. <hi rend='italic'>Noct.</hi> xii. 1.)</note> strenuously urged upon
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
mothers the duty of themselves suckling their children; and
many minute and stringent precepts were made against
extravagances of dress and manners. The religious institutions
of Greece and Asia Minor, which had almost consecrated
prostitution, were for ever abolished, and the courtesan
sank into a lower stage of degradation.
</p>

<p>
Besides these changes, the duty of reciprocal fidelity in
marriage was enforced with a new earnestness. The contrast
between the levity with which the frailty of men has
in most ages been regarded, and the extreme severity with
which women who have been guilty of the same offence have
generally been treated, forms one of the most singular
anomalies in moral history, and appears the more remarkable
when we remember that the temptation usually springs from
the sex which is so readily pardoned; that the sex which
is visited with such crushing penalties is proverbially the
most weak; and that, in the case of women, but not in the
case of men, the vice is very commonly the result of the most
abject misery and poverty. For this disparity of censure
several reasons have been assigned. The offence can be more
surely and easily detected, and therefore more certainly
punished, in the case of women than of men; and, as the duty
of providing for his children falls upon the father, the introduction
into the family of children who are not his own is a
special injury to him, while illegitimate children who do not
spring from adultery will probably, on account of their father
having entered into no compact to support them, ultimately
become criminals or paupers, and therefore a burden to
society.<note place='foot'>These are the reasons given by Malthus, <hi rend='italic'>On Population</hi>, book
iii. ch. ii.</note> It may be added, I think, that several causes
render the observance of this virtue more difficult for one sex
than for the other; that its violation, when every allowance
has been made for the moral degradation which is a result of
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
the existing condition of public opinion, is naturally more
profoundly prejudicial to the character of women than of
men; and also that much of our feeling on these subjects is
due to laws and moral systems which were formed by men,
and were in the first instance intended for their own protection.
</p>

<p>
The passages in the Fathers, asserting the equality of the
obligation imposed upon both sexes, are exceedingly unequivocal;<note place='foot'>St. Augustine (<hi rend='italic'>De Conj.
Adult.</hi> ii. 19) maintains that adultery
is even more criminal in the
man than in the woman. St.
Jerome has an impressive passage
on the subject: <q>Aliæ sunt leges
Cæsarum, aliæ Christi; aliud
Papianus, aliud Paulus nostri
præcepit. Apud illos viris impudicitiæ
fræna laxantur et solo
stupro atque adulterio condemnato
passim per lupanaria et ancillulas
libido permittitur, quasi culpam
dignitas faciat non voluntas. Apud
nos quod non licet feminis æque
non licet viris; et eadem servitus
pari conditione censetur.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ep.</hi>
lxxvii. St. Chrysostom writes in
a similar strain.</note>
and although the doctrine itself had been anticipated
by Seneca and Plutarch, it had probably never before, and it
has never since, been so fully realised as in the early Church.
It cannot, however, be said that the conquest has been
retained. At the present day, although the standard of
morals is far higher than in Pagan Rome, it may be
questioned whether the inequality of the censure which is
bestowed upon the two sexes is not as great as in the days
of Paganism, and that inequality is continually the cause of
the most shameful and the most pitiable injustice. In one
respect, indeed, a great retrogression resulted from chivalry,
and long survived its decay. The character of the seducer,
and especially of the passionless seducer who pursues his
career simply as a kind of sport, and under the influence of
no stronger motive than vanity or a spirit of adventure, has
been glorified and idealised in the popular literature of
Christendom in a manner to which we can find no parallel
in antiquity. When we reflect that the object of such a man
is by the coldest and most deliberate treachery to blast the
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
lives of innocent women; when we compare the levity of
his motive with the irreparable injury he inflicts; and when
we remember that he can only deceive his victim by
persuading her to love him, and can only ruin her by
persuading her to trust him, it must be owned that it would
be difficult to conceive a cruelty more wanton and more
heartless, or a character combining more numerous elements
of infamy and of dishonour. That such a character should
for many centuries have been the popular ideal of a considerable
section of literature, and the boast of numbers
who most plume themselves upon their honour, is assuredly
one of the most mournful facts in history, and it represents
a moral deflection certainly not less than was revealed
in ancient Greece by the position that was assigned to the
courtesan.
</p>

<p>
The fundamental truth, that the same act can never be at
once venial for a man to demand, and infamous for a woman
to accord, though nobly enforced by the early Christians, has
not passed into the popular sentiment of Christendom. The
mystical character, however, which the Church imparted to
marriage has been extremely influential. Partly by raising
it into a sacrament, and partly by representing it as, in
some mysterious and not very definable sense, an image of
the union of Christ with His Church, a feeling was fostered
that a lifelong union of one man and one woman is, under
all circumstances, the single form of intercourse between the
sexes which is not illegitimate; and this conviction has
acquired the force of a primal moral intuition.
</p>

<p>
There can, I think, be little doubt that, in the stringency
with which it is usually laid down, it rests not upon the law
of nature, but upon positive law, although unassisted nature
is sufficient to lead men many steps in its direction. Considering
the subject simply in the light of unaided reason,
two rules comprise the whole duty of man. He must abstain
from whatever injures happiness or degrades character.
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
Under the first head, he must include the more remote
as well as the immediate consequences of his act. He must
consider how his partner will be affected by the union, the
light in which society will view the connection, the probable
position of the children to be born, the effect of these births,
and also the effect of his example upon the well-being of
society at large. Some of the elements of this calculation
vary in different stages of society. Thus, public opinion in
one age will reprobate, and therefore punish, connections
which, in another age, are fully sanctioned; and the probable
position of the children, as well as the effect of the births
upon society, will depend greatly upon particular and
national circumstances.
</p>

<p>
Under the second head is comprised the influence of this
intercourse in clouding or developing the moral feelings,
lowering or elevating the tone of character, exciting or allaying
the aberrations of the imagination, incapacitating men for
pure affections or extending their range, making the animal
part of our nature more or less predominant. We know, by
the intuition of our moral nature, that this predominance is
always a degraded, though it is not always an unhappy, condition.
We also know that it is a law of our being, that
powerful and beautiful affections, which had before been
latent, are evoked in some particular forms of union, while
other forms of union are peculiarly fitted to deaden the
affections and to pervert the character.
</p>

<p>
In these considerations we have ample grounds for
maintaining that the lifelong union of one man and of one
woman should be the normal or dominant type of intercourse
between the sexes. We can prove that it is on the whole
most conducive to the happiness, and also to the moral
elevation, of all parties. But beyond this point it would,
I conceive, be impossible to advance, except by the assistance
of a special revelation. It by no means follows that because
this should be the dominant type it should be the only one,
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
or that the interests of society demand that all connections
should be forced into the same die. Connections, which were
confessedly only for a few years, have always subsisted side
by side with permanent marriages; and in periods when public
opinion, acquiescing in their propriety, inflicts no excommunication
on one or both of the partners, when these
partners are not living the demoralising and degrading life
which accompanies the consciousness of guilt, and when
proper provision is made for the children who are born, it
would be, I believe, impossible to prove, by the light of
simple and unassisted reason, that such connections should be
invariably condemned. It is extremely important, both for
the happiness and for the moral well-being of men, that lifelong
unions should not be effected simply under the imperious
prompting of a blind appetite. There are always multitudes
who, in the period of their lives when their passions are most
strong, are incapable of supporting children in their own
social rank, and who would therefore injure society by
marrying in it, but are nevertheless perfectly capable of
securing an honourable career for their illegitimate children
in the lower social sphere to which these would naturally
belong. Under the conditions I have mentioned, these
connections are not injurious, but beneficial, to the weaker
partner; they soften the differences of rank, they stimulate
social habits, and they do not produce upon character the
degrading effect of promiscuous intercourse, or upon society
the injurious effects of imprudent marriages, one or other of
which will multiply in their absence. In the immense
variety of circumstances and characters, cases will always
appear in which, on utilitarian grounds, they might seem
advisable.
</p>

<p>
It is necessary to dwell upon such considerations as these,
if we would understand the legislation of the Pagan Empire
or the changes that were effected by Christianity. The
legislators of the Empire distinctly recognised these connections,
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
and made it a main object to authorise, dignify, and
regulate them. The unlimited licence of divorce practically
included them under the name of marriage, while that name
sheltered them from stigma, and prevented many of the
gravest evils of unauthorised unions. The word concubine
also, which in the Republic had the same signification as
among ourselves, represented in the Empire a strictly legal
union&mdash;an innovation which was chiefly due to Augustus,
and was doubtless intended as part of the legislation against
celibacy, and also, it may be, as a corrective of the licentious
habits that were general. This union was in essentials
merely a form of marriage, for he who, having a concubine,
took to himself either a wife or another concubine, was
legally guilty of adultery. Like the commonest form of
marriage, it was consummated without any ceremony, and
was dissoluble at will. Its peculiarities were that it was
contracted between men of patrician rank and freedwomen,
who were forbidden by law to intermarry; that the concubine,
though her position was perfectly recognised and honourable,
did not share the rank of her partner, that she brought no
dowry, and that her children followed her rank, and were
excluded from the rank and the inheritance of their
father.<note place='foot'>See Troplong, <hi rend='italic'>Influence du
Christianisme sur le Droit</hi>, pp. 239-251.</note>
</p>

<p>
Against these notions Christianity declared a direct and
implacable warfare, which was imperfectly reflected in the
civil legislation, but appeared unequivocally in the writings
of the Fathers, and in most of the decrees of the Councils.<note place='foot'>We find, however, traces of a
toleration of the Roman type of concubine
in Christianity for some
time. Thus, a Council of Toledo
decreed: <q>Si quis habens uxorem
fidelis concubinam habeat non communicet.
Cæterum is qui non habet
uxorem et pro uxore concubinam
habet a communione non repellatur,
tantum ut unius mulieris, aut uxoris
aut concubinæ ut ei placuerit, sit
conjunctione contentus.</q>&mdash;1 <hi rend='italic'>Can.</hi>
17. St. Isidore said: <q>Christiano
non dicam plurimas sed nec duas
simul habere licitum est, nisi unam
tantum aut uxorem, aut certo loco
uxoris, si conjux deest, concubinam.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Apud
Gratianum</hi>, diss. 4. Quoted
by Natalis Alexander, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>
Sæc. I. diss. 29. Mr. Lea (<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of
Sacerdotal Celibacy</hi>, pp. 203-205)
has devoted an extremely interesting
note to tracing the history of
the word concubine through the
middle ages. He shows that even
up to the thirteenth century a concubine
was not necessarily an abandoned
woman. The term was applied
to marriages that were real,
but not officially recognised. Coleridge
notices a remarkable instance
of the revival of this custom in
German history.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Notes on English
Divines</hi> (ed. 1853), vol. i. p. 221.</note>
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
It taught, as a religious dogma, invariable, inflexible, and
independent of all utilitarian calculations, that all forms of
intercourse of the sexes, other than lifelong unions, were
criminal. By teaching men to regard this doctrine as axiomatic,
and therefore inflicting severe social penalties and
deep degradation on transient connections, it has profoundly
modified even their utilitarian aspect, and has rendered them
in most countries furtive and disguised. There is probably
no other branch of ethics which has been so largely determined
by special dogmatic theology, and there is none which
would be so deeply affected by its decay.
</p>

<p>
As a part of the same movement, the purely civil marriage
of the later Pagan Empire was gradually replaced by
religious marriages. There is a manifest propriety in
invoking a divine benediction upon an act which forms so
important an epoch in life, and the mingling of a religious
ceremony impresses a deeper sense of the solemnity of the
contract. The essentially religious and even mystical character
imparted by Christianity to marriage rendered the
consecration peculiarly natural, but it was only very
gradually that it came to be looked upon as absolutely
necessary. As I have already noticed, it was long dispensed
with in the marriage of slaves; and even in the case of
freemen, though generally performed, it was not made compulsory
till the tenth century.<note place='foot'>Legouvé, p. 199.</note> In addition to its primary
object of sanctifying marriage, it became in time a powerful
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
instrument in securing the authority of the priesthood, who
were able to compel men to submit to the conditions they
imposed in the formation of the most important contract of
life; and the modern authorisation of civil marriages, by
diminishing greatly the power of the Catholic priesthood
over domestic life, has been one of the most severe blows
ecclesiastical influence has undergone.
</p>

<p>
The absolute sinfulness of divorce was at the same time
strenuously maintained by the Councils, which in this, as
in many other points, differed widely from the civil law.
Constantine restricted it to three cases of crime on the part
of the husband, and three on the part of the wife; but the
habits of the people were too strong for his enactments, and,
after one or two changes in the law, the full latitude of
divorce reappeared in the Justinian Code. The Fathers, on
the other hand, though they hesitated a little about the case
of a divorce which followed an act of adultery on the part of
the wife,<note place='foot'>See some curious passages in
Troplong, pp. 222-223. The Fathers
seem to have thought dissolution
of marriage was not lawful on account
of the adultery of the husband,
but that it was not absolutely
unlawful, though not commendable,
for a husband whose wife had committed
adultery to re-marry.</note> had no hesitation whatever in pronouncing all
other divorces to be criminal, and periods of penitential
discipline were imposed upon Christians who availed themselves
of the privileges of the civil law.<note place='foot'>Some of the great charities of
Fabiola were performed as penances,
on account of her crime in
availing herself of the legislative
permission of divorce.</note> For many centuries
this duality of legislation continued. The barbarian laws
restricted divorce by imposing severe fines on those who
repudiated their wives. Charlemagne pronounced divorce to
be criminal, but did not venture to make it penal, and he
practised it himself. On the other hand, the Church threatened
with excommunication, and in some cases actually
launched its thunders against, those who were guilty of it.
It was only in the twelfth century that the victory was
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
definitely achieved, and the civil law, adopting the principle
of the canon law, prohibited all divorce.<note place='foot'>Laboulaye, <hi rend='italic'>Recherches sur la Condition civile et politique des
Femmes</hi>, pp. 152-158.</note>
</p>

<p>
I do not propose in the present work to examine how far
this total prohibition has been for the happiness or the moral
well-being of men. I will simply observe that, though it is
now often defended, it was not originally imposed in Christian
nations, upon utilitarian grounds, but was based upon the sacramental
character of marriage, upon the belief that marriage
is the special symbol of the perpetual union of Christ with
His Church, and upon a well-known passage in the Gospels.
The stringency of the Catholic doctrine, which forbids the
dissolution of marriage even in the case of adultery, has
been considerably relaxed by modern legislation, and there
can, I think, be little doubt that further steps will yet be
taken in the same direction; but the vast change that was
effected in both practice and theory since the unlimited
licence of the Pagan Empire must be manifest to all.
</p>

<p>
It was essential, or at least very important, that a union
which was so solemn and so irrevocable should be freely
contracted. The sentiment of the Roman patriots towards
the close of the Republic was that marriage should be
regarded as a means of providing children for the State, and
should be entered into as a matter of duty with that view,
and the laws of Augustus had imposed many disqualifications
on those who abstained from it. Both of these inducements
to marriage passed away under the influence of Christianity.
The popular sentiment disappeared with the decline of civic
virtues. The laws were rescinded under the influence of the
ascetic enthusiasm which made men regard the state of
celibacy as pre-eminently holy.
</p>

<p>
There was still one other important condition to be
attained by theologians in order to realise their ideal type of
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
marriage. It was to prevent the members of the Church
from intermarrying with those whose religious opinions
differed from their own. Mixed marriages, it has been truly
said, may do more than almost any other influence to assuage
the rancour and the asperity of sects, but it must be added
that a considerable measure of tolerance must have been
already attained before they become possible. In a union in
which each partner believes and realises that the other is
doomed to an eternity of misery there can be no real
happiness, no sympathy, no trust; and a domestic agreement
that some of the children should be educated in one religion
and some in the other would be impossible when each parent
believed it to be an agreement that some children should be
doomed to hell.
</p>

<p>
The domestic unhappiness arising from differences of
belief was probably almost or altogether unknown in the
world before the introduction of Christianity; for, although
differences of opinion may have before existed, the same
momentous consequences were not attached to them. It has
been the especial bane of periods of great religious change,
such as the conversion of the Roman Empire, or the Reformation,
or our own day when far more serious questions
than those which agitated the sixteenth century are occupying
the attention of a large proportion of thinkers and scholars,
and when the deep and widening chasm between the religious
opinions of most highly educated men, and of the immense
majority of women, is painfully apparent. While a multitude
of scientific discoveries, critical and historical researches, and
educational reforms have brought thinking men face to face
with religious problems of extreme importance, women have
been almost absolutely excluded from their influence. Their
minds are usually by nature less capable than those of men
of impartiality and suspense, and the almost complete omission
from female education of those studies which most discipline
and strengthen the intellect increases the difference, while at
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
the same time it has been usually made a main object to
imbue them with a passionate faith in traditional opinions,
and to preserve them from all contact with opposing views.
But contracted knowledge and imperfect sympathy are not
the sole fruits of this education. It has always been the
peculiarity of a certain kind of theological teaching that
it inverts all the normal principles of judgment, and absolutely
destroys intellectual diffidence. On other subjects we
find, if not a respect for honest conviction, at least some sense
of the amount of knowledge that is requisite to entitle men
to express an opinion on grave controversies. A complete
ignorance of the subject-matter of a dispute restrains the
confidence of dogmatism; and an ignorant person, who is
aware that, by much reading and thinking in spheres of
which he has himself no knowledge, his educated neighbour
has modified or rejected opinions which that ignorant person
had been taught, will, at least if he is a man of sense or
modesty, abstain from compassionating the benighted condition
of his more instructed friend. But on theological
questions this has never been so. Unfaltering belief being
taught as the first of duties, and all doubt being usually
stigmatised as criminal or damnable, a state of mind is
formed to which we find no parallel in other fields. Many
men and most women, though completely ignorant of the
very rudiments of biblical criticism, historical research, or
scientific discoveries, though they have never read a single
page, or understood a single proposition of the writings of
those whom they condemn, and have absolutely no rational
knowledge either of the arguments by which their faith is
defended, or of those by which it has been impugned, will
nevertheless adjudicate with the utmost confidence upon
every polemical question; denounce, hate, pity, or pray for
the conversion of all who dissent from what they have been
taught; assume, as a matter beyond the faintest possibility of
doubt, that the opinions they have received without enquiry
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
must be true, and that the opinions which others have
arrived at by enquiry must be false, and make it a main
object of their lives to assail what they call heresy in every
way in their power, except by examining the grounds on
which it rests. It is probable that the great majority of
voices that swell the clamour against every book which is
regarded as heretical are the voices of those who would deem
it criminal even to open that book, or to enter into any real,
searching, and impartial investigation of the subject to which
it relates. Innumerable pulpits support this tone of thought,
and represent, with a fervid rhetoric well fitted to excite the
nerves and imaginations of women, the deplorable condition
of all who deviate from a certain type of opinions or of
emotions; a blind propagandism or a secret wretchedness
penetrates into countless households, poisoning the peace of
families, chilling the mutual confidence of husband and wife,
adding immeasurably to the difficulties which every searcher
into truth has to encounter, and diffusing far and wide
intellectual timidity, disingenuousness, and hypocrisy.
</p>

<p>
These domestic divisions became very apparent in the
period of the conversion of the Roman Empire; and a natural
desire to guard intact the orthodoxy and zeal of the converts,
and to prevent a continual discordance, stimulated the
Fathers in their very vehement denunciations of all mixed
marriages. We may also trace in these denunciations the
outline of a very singular doctrine, which was afterwards
suffered to fall into obscurity, but was revived in the last
century in England in a curious and learned work of the
nonjuror Dodwell.<note place='foot'><q>A discourse concerning the
obligation to marry within the true
communion, following from their
style (<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) of being called a holy
seed.</q> This rare discourse is appended
to a sermon against mixed
marriages by Leslie. (London,
1702.) The reader may find something
about Dodwell in Macaulay's
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. of England</hi>, ch. xiv.; but
Macaulay, who does not appear
to have known Dodwell's masterpiece&mdash;his
dissertation <hi rend='italic'>De Paucitate
Marturum</hi>, which is one of the finest
specimens of criticism of his time&mdash;and
who only knew the discourse on
marriages by extracts, has, I think,
done him considerable injustice.</note> The union of Christ and His Church
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
had been represented as a marriage; and this image was not
regarded as a mere metaphor or comparison, but as intimating
a mysterious unity, which, though not susceptible of any
very clear definition, was not on that account the less real.
Christians were the <q>limbs of Christ,</q> and for them to join
themselves in marriage with those who were not of the
Christian fold was literally, it was said, a species of adultery
or fornication. The intermarriage of the Israelites, the
chosen seed of the ancient world, with the Gentiles, had been
described in the Old Testament as an act of impurity;<note place='foot'>Dodwell relies mainly upon
this fact, and especially upon Ezra's
having treated these marriages as
essentially null.</note> and
in the opinion of some, at least, of the Fathers, the Christian
community occupied towards the unbelievers a position
analogous to that which the Jews had occupied towards the
Gentiles. St. Cyprian denounced the crime of those <q>who
prostitute the limbs of Christ in marriage with the Gentiles.</q><note place='foot'><q>Jungere cum infidelibus vinculum
matrimonii, prostituere gentilibus
membra Christi.</q>&mdash;Cyprian,
<hi rend='italic'>De Lapsis</hi>.</note>
Tertullian described the intermarriage as fornication;<note place='foot'><q>Hæc cum ita sint, fideles
Gentilium matrimonia subeuntes
stupri reos esse constat, et arcendos
ab omni communicatione fraternitatis.</q>&mdash;Tert.
<hi rend='italic'>Ad Uxor.</hi> ii. 3.</note> and
after the triumph of the Church, the intermarriage of Jews
and Christians was made a capital offence, and was stigmatised
by the law as adultery.<note place='foot'>See on this law, and on the
many councils which condemned
the marriage of orthodox with
heretics, Bingham, <hi rend='italic'>Antiq.</hi> xxii. 2,
§§ 1-2.</note> The civil law did not
prohibit the orthodox from intermarrying with heretics, but
many councils in strong terms denounced such marriages as
criminal.
</p>

<p>
The extreme sanctity attributed to virginity, the absolute
condemnation of all forms of sexual connection other than
marriage, and the formation and gradual realisation of the
Christian conception of marriage as a permanent union of a
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
man and woman of the same religious opinions, consecrated
by solemn religious services, carrying with it a deep religious
signification, and dissoluble only by death, were the most
obvious signs of Christian influence in the sphere of ethics
we are examining. Another very important result of the
new religion was to raise to a far greater honour than they
had previously possessed, the qualities in which women
peculiarly excel.
</p>

<p>
There are few more curious subjects of enquiry than the
distinctive differences between the sexes, and the manner in
which those differences have affected the ideal types of different
ages, nations, philosophies, and religions. Physically,
men have the indisputable superiority in strength, and
women in beauty. Intellectually, a certain inferiority of
the female sex can hardly be denied when we remember how
almost exclusively the foremost places in every department
of science, literature, and art have been occupied by men,
how infinitesimally small is the number of women who have
shown in any form the very highest order of genius, how
many of the greatest men have achieved their greatness in
defiance of the most adverse circumstances, and how completely
women have failed in obtaining the first position,
even in music or painting, for the cultivation of which their
circumstances would appear most propitious. It is as impossible
to find a female Raphael, or a female Handel, as a
female Shakspeare or Newton. Women are intellectually
more desultory and volatile than men; they are more occupied
with particular instances than with general principles;
they judge rather by intuitive perceptions than by deliberate
reasoning or past experience. They are, however, usually
superior to men in nimbleness and rapidity of thought, and in
the gift of tact or the power of seizing speedily and faithfully
the finer inflexions of feeling, and they have therefore often
attained very great eminence in conversation, as letter-writers,
as actresses, and as novelists.
</p>

<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>

<p>
Morally, the general superiority of women over men, is,
I think, unquestionable. If we take the somewhat coarse
and inadequate criterion of police statistics, we find that,
while the male and female populations are nearly the same
in number, the crimes committed by men are usually rather
more than five times as numerous as those committed by
women;<note place='foot'>Many curious statistics illustrating
this fact are given by M.
Bonneville de Marsangy&mdash;a Portuguese
writer who was counsellor of
the Imperial Court at Paris&mdash;in
his <hi rend='italic'>Étude sur la Moralité comparée
de la Femme et de l'Homme</hi>. (Paris,
1862.) The writer would have
done better if he had not maintained,
in lawyer fashion, that the
statistics of crime are absolutely
decisive on the question of the comparative
morality of the sexes, and
also, if he had not thought it due
to his official position to talk in a
rather grotesque strain about the
regeneration and glorification of
the sex in the person of the Empress
Eugénie.</note> and although it may be justly observed that men,
as the stronger sex, and the sex upon whom the burden of
supporting the family is thrown, have more temptations than
women, it must be remembered, on the other hand, that
extreme poverty which verges upon starvation is most common
among women, whose means of livelihood are most
restricted, and whose earnings are smallest and most precarious.
Self-sacrifice is the most conspicuous element of a
virtuous and religious character, and it is certainly far less
common among men than among women, whose whole lives
are usually spent in yielding to the will and consulting the
pleasures of another. There are two great departments of
virtue: the impulsive, or that which springs spontaneously
from the emotions; and the deliberative, or that which is
performed in obedience to the sense of duty; and in both of
these I imagine women are superior to men. Their sensibility
is greater, they are more chaste both in thought and
act, more tender to the erring, more compassionate to the
suffering, more affectionate to all about them. On the other
hand, those who have traced the course of the wives of the
poor, and of many who, though in narrow circumstances,
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
can hardly be called poor, will probably admit that in no
other class do we so often find entire lives spent in daily persistent
self-denial, in the patient endurance of countless trials,
in the ceaseless and deliberate sacrifice of their own enjoyments
to the well-being or the prospects of others. Women,
however, though less prone than men to intemperance and
brutality, are in general more addicted to the petty forms of
vanity, jealousy, spitefulness, and ambition, and they are
also inferior to men in active courage. In the courage of
endurance they are commonly superior; but their passive
courage is not so much fortitude which bears and defies, as
resignation which bears and bends. In the ethics of intellect
they are decidedly inferior. To repeat an expression I have
already employed, women very rarely love truth, though
they love passionately what they call <q>the truth,</q> or opinions
they have received from others, and hate vehemently those
who differ from them. They are little capable of impartiality
or of doubt; their thinking is chiefly a mode of feeling;
though very generous in their acts, they are rarely generous
in their opinions or in their judgments. They persuade
rather than convince, and value belief rather as a source of
consolation than as a faithful expression of the reality of
things. They are less capable than men of perceiving qualifying
circumstances, of admitting the existence of elements
of good in systems to which they are opposed, of distinguishing
the personal character of an opponent from the opinions
he maintains. Men lean most to justice and women to
mercy. Men excel in energy, self-reliance, perseverance, and
magnanimity; women in humility, gentleness, modesty, and
endurance. The realising imagination which causes us to
pity and to love is more sensitive in women than in men,
and it is especially more capable of dwelling on the unseen.
Their religious or devotional realisations are incontestably
more vivid; and it is probable that, while a father is most
moved by the death of a child in his presence, a mother
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
generally feels most the death of a child in some distant land.
But, though more intense, the sympathies of women are commonly
less wide than those of men. Their imaginations
individualise more; their affections are, in consequence, concentrated
rather on leaders than on causes; and if they care
for a great cause, it is generally because it is represented by
a great man, or connected with some one whom they love.
In politics, their enthusiasm is more naturally loyalty than
patriotism. In history, they are even more inclined than
men to dwell exclusively upon biographical incidents or
characteristics as distinguished from the march of general
causes. In benevolence, they excel in charity, which alleviates
individual suffering, rather than in philanthropy,
which deals with large masses and is more frequently employed
in preventing than in allaying calamity.
</p>

<p>
It was a remark of Winckelmann that <q>the supreme
beauty of Greek art is rather male than female;</q> and the
justice of this remark has been amply corroborated by the
greater knowledge we have of late years attained of the
works of the Phidian period, in which art achieved its
highest perfection, and in which, at the same time, force and
freedom, and masculine grandeur, were its pre-eminent
characteristics. A similar observation may be made of the
moral ideal of which ancient art was simply the expression.
In antiquity the virtues that were most admired were almost
exclusively those which are distinctively masculine. Courage,
self-assertion, magnanimity, and, above all, patriotism, were
the leading features of the ideal type; and chastity, modesty,
and charity, the gentler and the domestic virtues, which are
especially feminine, were greatly undervalued. With the
single exception of conjugal fidelity, none of the virtues that
were very highly prized were virtues distinctively or pre-eminently
feminine. With this exception, nearly all the
most illustrious women of antiquity were illustrious chiefly
because they overcame the natural conditions of their sex.
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
It is a characteristic fact that the favourite female ideal of
the artists appears to have been the Amazon.<note place='foot'>See Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Nat.</hi> xxxiv.
19.</note> We may
admire the Spartan mother, and the mother of the Gracchi,
repressing every sign of grief when their children were
sacrificed upon the altar of their country, we may wonder at
the majestic courage of a Porcia and an Arria; but we extol
them chiefly because, being women, they emancipated themselves
from the frailty of their sex, and displayed an heroic
fortitude worthy of the strongest and the bravest of men.
We may bestow an equal admiration upon the noble devotion
and charity of a St. Elizabeth of Hungary, or of a Mrs.
Fry, but we do not admire them because they displayed these
virtues, although they were women, for we feel that their
virtues were of the kind which the female nature is most
fitted to produce. The change from the heroic to the saintly
ideal, from the ideal of Paganism to the ideal of Christianity,
was a change from a type which was essentially male to one
which was essentially feminine. Of all the great schools of
philosophy no other reflected so faithfully the Roman conception
of moral excellence as Stoicism, and the greatest
Roman exponent of Stoicism summed up its character in a
single sentence when he pronounced it to be beyond all other
sects the most emphatically masculine.<note place='foot'><q>Tantum inter Stoicos, Serene,
et ceteros sapientiam professos interesse,
quantum inter fœminas et
mares non immerito dixerim.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>De
Const. Sapientis</hi>, cap. i.</note> On the other hand,
an ideal type in which meekness, gentleness, patience,
humility, faith, and love are the most prominent features, is
not naturally male but female. A reason probably deeper
than the historical ones which are commonly alleged, why
sculpture has always been peculiarly Pagan and painting
peculiarly Christian, may be found in the fact, that sculpture
is especially suited to represent male beauty, or the beauty of
strength, and painting female beauty, or the beauty of softness;
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
and that Pagan sentiment was chiefly a glorification
of the masculine qualities of strength, and courage, and conscious
virtue, while Christian sentiment is chiefly a glorification
of the feminine qualities of gentleness, humility, and
love. The painters whom the religious feeling of Christendom
has recognised as the most faithful exponents of Christian
sentiment have always been those who infused a large
measure of feminine beauty even into their male characters;
and we never, or scarcely ever, find that the same artist has
been conspicuously successful in delineating both Christian
and Pagan types. Michael Angelo, whose genius loved to
expatiate on the sublimity of strength and defiance, failed
signally in his representations of the Christian ideal; and
Perugino was equally unsuccessful when he sought to pourtray
the features of the heroes of antiquity.<note place='foot'>This is well illustrated, on the
one side, by the most repulsive representations
of Christ, by Michael
Angelo, in the great fresco in the
Sistine Chapel (so inferior to the
Christ of Orgagna, at Pisa, from
which it was partly imitated), and
in marble in the Minerva Church
at Rome; and, on the other side,
by the frescoes of Perugino, at
Perugia, representing the great
sages of Paganism. The figure of
Cato, in the latter, almost approaches,
as well as I remember,
the type of St. John.</note> The position
that was gradually assigned to the Virgin as the female ideal
in the belief and the devotion of Christendom, was a consecration
or an expression of the new value that was attached
to the feminine virtues.
</p>

<p>
The general superiority of women to men in the strength
of their religious emotions, and their natural attraction to a
religion which made personal attachment to its Founder its
central duty, and which imparted an unprecedented dignity
and afforded an unprecedented scope to their characteristic
virtues, account for the very conspicuous position that female
influence assumed in the great work of the conversion of the
Roman Empire. In no other important movement of thought
was it so powerful or so acknowledged. In the ages of
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
persecution female figures occupy many of the foremost
places in the ranks of martyrdom, and Pagan and Christian
writers alike attest the alacrity with which women flocked
to the Church, and the influence they exercised in its favour
over the male members of their families. The mothers of
St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, St. Basil, St. Gregory
Nazianzen, and Theodoret, had all a leading part in the
conversion of their sons. St. Helena, the mother of
Constantine, Flacilla, the wife of Theodosius the Great, St.
Pulcheria, the sister of Theodosius the Younger, and Placidia,
the mother of Valentinian III., were among the most
conspicuous defenders of the faith. In the heretical sects the
same zeal was manifested, and Arius, Priscillian, and
Montanus were all supported by troops of zealous female
devotees. In the career of asceticism women took a part
little if at all inferior to men, while in the organisation of
the great work of charity they were pre-eminent. For no
other field of active labour are women so admirably suited as
for this; and although we may trace from the earliest period,
in many creeds and ages, individual instances of their
influence in allaying the sufferings of the distressed,<note place='foot'>In that fine description of a
virtuous woman which is ascribed
to the mother of King Lemuel, we
read: <q>She stretcheth out her hand
to the poor; yea, she reacheth
forth her hands to the needy.</q>
(Proverbs xxxi. 20.) I have
already quoted from Xenophon
the beautiful description of the
Greek wife tending her sick slaves.
So, too, Euripides represents the
slaves of Alcestis gathering with
tears around the bed of their
dying mistress, who, even then,
found some kind word for each,
and, when she died, lamenting her
as their second mother. (Eurip.
<hi rend='italic'>Alcest.</hi>) In the servile war which
desolated Sicily at the time of the
Punic wars, we find a touching
trait of the same kind. The
revolt was provoked by the cruelties
of a rich man, named Damophilus,
and his wife, who were
massacred with circumstances of
great atrocity; but the slaves
preserved their daughter entirely
unharmed, for she had always
made it her business to console
them in their sorrow, and she had
won the love of all. (Diodor. Sic.
<hi rend='italic'>Frag.</hi> xxxiv.) So, too, Marcia,
the wife of Cato, used to suckle
her young slaves from her breast.
(Plut. <hi rend='italic'>Marc. Cato</hi>.) I may add
the well-known sentiment which
Virgil puts in the mouth of Dido:
<q>Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere
disco.</q> There are, doubtless,
many other touches of the
same kind in ancient literature,
some of which may occur to my
readers.</note> it may
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
be truly said that their instinct and genius of charity had
never before the dawn of Christianity obtained full scope for
action. Fabiola, Paula, Melania, and a host of other noble
ladies devoted their time and fortunes mainly to founding
and extending vast institutions of charity, some of them of a
kind before unknown in the world. The Empress Flacilla
was accustomed to tend with her own hands the sick in the
hospitals,<note place='foot'>Theodoret, v. 19.</note> and a readiness to discharge such offices was
deemed the first duty of a Christian wife.<note place='foot'>See the beautiful description
of the functions of a Christian
woman in the second book of Tertullian,
<hi rend='italic'>Ad Uxorem</hi>.</note> From age to age
the impulse thus communicated has been felt. There has
been no period, however corrupt, there has been no Church,
however superstitious, that has not been adorned by many
Christian women devoting their entire lives to assuaging the
sufferings of men; and the mission of charity thus instituted
has not been more efficacious in diminishing the sum of human
wretchedness, than in promoting the moral dignity of those by
whom it was conducted.
</p>

<p>
Among the Collyridian heretics, women were admitted to
the priesthood. Among the orthodox, although this honour
was not bestowed upon them, they received a religious
consecration, and discharged some minor ecclesiastical functions
under the name of deaconesses.<note place='foot'>See, upon the deaconesses,
Bingham's <hi rend='italic'>Christian Antiquities</hi>,
book ii. ch. 22, and Ludlow's
<hi rend='italic'>Woman's Work in the Church</hi>.
The latter author argues elaborately
that the <q>widows</q> were not
the same as the deaconesses.</note> This order may be
traced to the Apostolic period.<note place='foot'>Phœbe (Rom. xvi. 1) is
described as a διάκονος.</note> It consisted of elderly
virgins, who were set apart by a formal ordination, and were
employed in assisting as catechists and attendants at the
baptism of women, in visiting the sick, ministering to martyrs
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
in prison, preserving order in the congregations, and accompanying
and presenting women who desired an interview
with the bishop. It would appear, from the evidence of
some councils, that abuses gradually crept into this institution,
and the deaconesses at last faded into simple nuns, but they
were still in existence in the East in the twelfth century.
Besides these, widows, when they had been but once married,
were treated with peculiar honour, and were made the
special recipients of the charity of the Church. Women
advanced in years, who, either from their single life or from
bereavement, have been left without any male protector in
the world, have always been peculiarly deserving of commiseration.
With less strength, and commonly with less
means, and less knowledge of the world than men, they are
liable to contract certain peculiarities of mind and manner to
which an excessive amount of ridicule has been attached, and
age in most cases furnishes them with very little to
compensate for the charms of which it has deprived them.
The weight and dignity of matured wisdom, which make
the old age of one sex so venerable, are more rarely found
in that of the other, and even physical beauty is more
frequently the characteristic of an old man than of an old
woman. The Church laboured steadily to cast a halo of
reverence around this period of woman's life, and its religious
exercises have done very much to console and to occupy it.
</p>

<p>
In accordance with these ideas, the Christian legislators
contributed largely to improve the legal position of widows in
respect to property,<note place='foot'>A very able writer, who takes
on the whole an unfavourable
view of the influence of Christianity
on legislation, says: <q>The
provision for the widow was
attributable to the exertions of the
Church, which never relaxed its
solicitude for the interests of wives
surviving their husbands, winning,
perhaps, one of the most arduous
of its triumphs when, after exacting
for two or three centuries an
express promise from the husband
at marriage to endow his wife,
it at last succeeded in engrafting
the principle of dower on the
customary law of all Western
Europe.</q>&mdash;Maine's <hi rend='italic'>Ancient Law</hi>, p.
224.</note> and Justinian gave mothers the guardianship
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
of their children, destroying the Pagan rule that
guardianship could only be legally exercised by men.<note place='foot'>See Troplong, <hi rend='italic'>Influence du
Christianisme sur le Droit</hi>, pp.
308-310.</note> The
usual subservience of the sex to ecclesiastical influence, the
numerous instances of rich widows devoting their fortunes,
and mothers their sons, to the Church, had no
doubt some influence in securing the advocacy of the clergy;
but these measures had a manifest importance in elevating
the position of women who have had, in Christian lands, a
great, though not, I think, altogether a beneficial influence,
in the early education of their sons.
</p>

<p>
Independently of all legal enactments, the simple change
of the ideal type by bringing specially feminine virtues into
the forefront was sufficient to elevate and ennoble the sex.
The commanding position of the mediæval abbesses, the great
number of female saints, and especially the reverence bestowed
upon the Virgin, had a similar effect. It is remarkable that
the Jews, who, of the three great nations of antiquity,
certainly produced in history and poetry the smallest number
of illustrious women, should have furnished the world with
its supreme female ideal, and it is also a striking illustration
of the qualities which prove most attractive in woman that
one of whom we know nothing except her gentleness and
her sorrow should have exercised a magnetic power upon
the world incomparably greater than was exercised by the
most majestic female patriots of Paganism. Whatever may
be thought of its theological propriety, there can be little
doubt that the Catholic reverence for the Virgin has done
much to elevate and purify the ideal of woman, and to soften
the manners of men. It has had an influence which the
worship of the Pagan goddesses could never possess, for these
had been almost destitute of moral beauty, and especially of
that kind of moral beauty which is peculiarly feminine.
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
It supplied in a great measure the redeeming and ennobling
element in that strange amalgam of religious, licentious, and
military feeling which was formed around women in the age
of chivalry, and which no succeeding change of habit or belief
has wholly destroyed.
</p>

<p>
It can hardly, I think, be questioned that in the great
religious convulsions of the sixteenth century the feminine
type followed Catholicism, while Protestantism inclined more
to the masculine type. Catholicism alone retained the
Virgin worship, which at once reflected and sustained the
first. The skill with which it acts upon the emotions by
music, and painting, and solemn architecture, and imposing
pageantry, its tendency to appeal to the imagination rather
than to the reason, and to foster modes of feeling rather than
modes of thought, its assertion of absolute and infallible
certainty, above all, the manner in which it teaches its
votary to throw himself perpetually on authority, all tended
in the same direction. It is the part of a woman to lean, it
is the part of a man to stand. A religion which prescribes
to the distracted mind unreasoning faith in an infallible
Church, and to the troubled conscience an implicit trust in
an absolving priesthood, has ever had an especial attraction
to a feminine mind. A religion which recognises no authority
between man and his Creator, which asserts at once the
dignity and the duty of private judgment, and which, while
deepening immeasurably the sense of individual responsibility,
denudes religion of meretricious ornaments, and of most
æsthetic aids, is pre-eminently a religion of men. Puritanism
is the most masculine form that Christianity has yet assumed.
Its most illustrious teachers differed from the Catholic
saints as much in the moral type they displayed as in the
system of doctrines they held. Catholicism commonly softens,
while Protestantism strengthens, the character; but the softness
of the first often degenerates into weakness, and the strength
of the second into hardness. Sincerely Catholic nations are
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
distinguished for their reverence, for their habitual and vivid
perceptions of religious things, for the warmth of their
emotions, for a certain amiability of disposition, and a certain
natural courtesy and refinement of manner that are inexpressibly
winning. Sincerely Protestant nations are distinguished
for their love of truth, for their firm sense of duty,
for the strength and the dignity of their character. Loyalty
and humility, which are especially feminine, flourish chiefly
in the first; liberty and self-assertion in the second. The
first are most prone to superstition, and the second to
fanaticism. Protestantism, by purifying and dignifying
marriage, conferred a great benefit upon women; but it must
be owned that neither in its ideal type, nor in the general
tenor of its doctrines or devotions, is it as congenial to their
nature as the religion it superseded.
</p>

<p>
Its complete suppression of the conventual system was
also, I think, very far from a benefit to women or to the
world. It would be impossible to conceive any institution
more needed than one which would furnish a shelter for the
many women who, from poverty, or domestic unhappiness,
or other causes, find themselves cast alone and unprotected
into the battle of life, which would secure them from the
temptations to gross vice, and from the extremities of suffering,
and would convert them into agents of active, organised,
and intelligent charity. Such an institution would be almost
free from the objections that may justly be urged against
monasteries, which withdraw strong men from manual labour,
and it would largely mitigate the difficulty of providing labour
and means of livelihood for single women, which is one of
the most pressing, in our own day one of the most appalling,
of social problems. Most unhappily for mankind, this noble
conception was from the first perverted. Institutions that
might have had an incalculable philanthropic value were
based upon the principle of asceticism, which makes the
sacrifice, not the promotion, of earthly happiness its aim, and
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
binding vows produced much misery and not a little vice.
The convent became the perpetual prison of the daughter
whom a father was disinclined to endow, or of young girls
who, under the impulse of a transient enthusiasm, or of a
transient sorrow, took a step which they never could retrace,
and useless penances and contemptible superstitions wasted
the energies that might have been most beneficially employed.
Still it is very doubtful whether, even in the most degraded
period, the convents did not prevent more misery than they
inflicted, and in the Sisters of Charity the religious orders of
Catholicism have produced one of the most perfect of all the
types of womanhood. There is, as I conceive, no fact in
modern history more deeply to be deplored than that the
Reformers, who in matters of doctrinal innovations were
often so timid, should have levelled to the dust, instead of
attempting to regenerate, the whole conventual system of
Catholicism.
</p>

<p>
The course of these observations has led me to transgress
the limits assigned to this history. It has been, however,
my object through this entire work to exhibit not only the
nature but also the significance of the moral facts I have
recorded, by showing how they have affected the subsequent
changes of society. I will conclude this chapter, and this
work, by observing that of all the departments of ethics
the questions concerning the relations of the sexes and the
proper position of women are those upon the future of which
there rests the greatest uncertainty. History tells us that,
as civilisation advances, the charity of men becomes at once
warmer and more expansive, their habitual conduct both
more gentle and more temperate, and their love of truth
more sincere; but it also warns us that in periods of great
intellectual enlightenment, and of great social refinement,
the relations of the sexes have often been most anarchical.
It is impossible to deny that the form which these relations
at present assume has been very largely affected by special
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
religious teaching, which, for good or for ill, is rapidly
waning in the sphere of government, and also, that certain
recent revolutions in economical opinion and industrial
enterprise have a most profound bearing upon the subject.
The belief that a rapid increase of population is always
eminently beneficial, which was long accepted as an axiom
by both statesmen and moralists, and was made the basis of
a large part of the legislation of the first and of the decisions
of the second, has now been replaced by the directly opposite
doctrine, that the very highest interest of society is not to
stimulate but to restrain multiplication, diminishing the
number of marriages and of children. In consequence of
this belief, and of the many factitious wants that accompany
a luxurious civilisation, a very large and increasing proportion
of women are left to make their way in life without any
male protector, and the difficulties they have to encounter
through physical weakness have been most unnaturally and
most fearfully aggravated by laws and customs which, resting
on the old assumption that every woman should be a
wife, habitually deprive them of the pecuniary and educational
advantages of men, exclude them absolutely from very many
of the employments in which they might earn a subsistence,
encumber their course in others by a heartless ridicule or by
a steady disapprobation, and consign, in consequence, many
thousands to the most extreme and agonising poverty, and
perhaps a still larger number to the paths of vice. At the
same time a momentous revolution, the effects of which can
as yet be but imperfectly descried, has taken place in the
chief spheres of female industry that remain. The progress
of machinery has destroyed its domestic character. The
distaff has fallen from the hand. The needle is being rapidly
superseded, and the work which, from the days of Homer to
the present century, was accomplished in the centre of the
family, has been transferred to the crowded manufactory.<note place='foot'>The results of this change have been treated by Miss Parkes
in her truly admirable little book
called <hi rend='italic'>Essays on Woman's Work</hi>,
better than by any other writer
with whom I am acquainted.</note>
</p>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<p>
The probable consequences of these things are among the
most important questions that can occupy the moralist or
the philanthropist, but they do not fall within the province
of the historian. That the pursuits and education of women
will be considerably altered, that these alterations will bring
with them some modifications of the type of character, and
that the prevailing moral notions concerning the relations of
the sexes will be subjected in many quarters to a severe and
hostile criticism, may safely be predicted. Many wild
theories will doubtless be propounded. Some real ethical
changes may perhaps be effected, but these, if I mistake not,
can only be within definite and narrow limits. He who
will seriously reflect upon our clear perceptions of the
difference between purity and impurity, upon the laws that
govern our affections, and upon the interests of the children
who are born, may easily convince himself that in this, as in
all other spheres, there are certain eternal moral landmarks
which never can be removed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Abortion, diversities of moral judgment respecting, i. 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the practice of, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Abraham the Hermit, St., ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Acacius, his ransom of Persian slaves, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Adultery, laws concerning, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Æschylus, his views of human nature, i. 196.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His violation of dramatic probabilities, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Affections, the, all forms of self-love, according to some Utilitarians, i. 9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Subjugation of the, to the reason, taught by the Stoics, &amp;c., 177, 187.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Considered by the Stoics as a disease, 188.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Evil consequences of their suppression, 191</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Africa, sacrifices of children to Saturn in, ii. <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the conquest of Genseric of, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agapæ, or love feasts, of the Christians, how regarded by the pagans, i. 415; ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Excesses of the, and their suppression, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agnes, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agricultural pursuits, history of the decline of, in Italy, i. 266.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Efforts to relieve the agriculturists, 267</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Albigenses, their slow suicides, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexander the Great: effect of his career on Greek cosmopolitanism, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexandria, foundation of, i. 230.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the increasing importance of, on Roman thought, 319.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Decian persecution at, 451.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Excesses of the Christian sects of, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alexis, St., his legend, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alimentus, Cincius, his work written in Greek, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Almsgiving, effects of indiscriminate, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amafanius, wrote the first Latin work on philosophy, i. 175, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ambrose, St., his miraculous dream, i. 379.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His dissection of the pagan theory of the decline of the Roman empire, 409.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His ransom of Italians from the Goths, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His commendation of disobedience to parents, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>American Indians, suicide of the, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ammon, St., his refusal to wash himself, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Deserts his wife, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amour, William de St., his denunciation of the mendicant orders, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Amphitheatres, history and remains of Roman, i. 273</l>
</lg>

<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>

<lg>
<l>Anaxagoras, on the death of his son, i. 191.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On his true country, 201</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anchorites. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ascetics'>Ascetics</ref>; <ref target='Index-Monastic'>Monasticism</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Angelo, Michael, in what he failed, ii. <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anglo-Saxon nations, their virtues and vices, i. 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Animals, lower, Egyptian worship of, i. 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Humanity to animals probably first advocated by Plutarch, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Animals employed in the arena at Rome, 280.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instances of kindness to, 288, 307.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends of the connection of the saints and the animal world, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pagan legends of the intelligence of animals, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legislative protection of them, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views as to the souls of animals, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral duty of kindness to animals taught by pagans, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends in the lives of the saints in connection with animals, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Progress in modern times of humanity to animals, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antigonus of Socho, his doctrine of virtue, i. 183, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antioch, charities of, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its extreme vice and asceticism, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antisthenes, his scepticism, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus, the philosopher, his prediction, i. 427</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antoninus the Pious, his death, i. 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His leniency towards the Christians, 438, 439.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Forged letter of, 439, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His charity, ii. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Antony, St., his flight into the desert, ii. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His mode of life, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His dislike to knowledge, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of his visit to Paul the hermit, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aphrodite, the celestial and earthly, i. 106</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollonius of Tyana, his conversation with an Egyptian priest respecting the Greek and Egyptian modes of worshipping the deity, i. 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miracles attributed to him, 372.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His humanity to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apollonius, the merchant, his dispensary for monks, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Apuleius, his condemnation of suicide, i. 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His disquisition on the doctrine of dæmons, 323.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical form of his philosophy, 329.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miracles attributed to him, 372.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His defence of tooth-powder, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Archytas of Tarentum, his speech on the evils of sensuality, i. 200, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Argos, story of the sons of the priestess of Juno at, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arians, their charges against the Catholics, i. 418, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristides, his gentleness, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, his admission of the practice of abortion, i. 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Emphasis with which he dwelt upon the utility of virtue, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His patriotism, 200.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of suicide, 212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opinions as to the duties of Greeks to barbarians, 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arius, death of, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arnobius, on the miracles of Christ, i. 375</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arrian, his humanity to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Arsenius, St., his penances, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His anxiety to avoid distractions, 125, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Ascetics'/>
<l>Ascetics, their estimate of the dreadful nature of sin, i. 113.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decline of asceticism and evanescence of the moral notions of which it was the expression, 113.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of society to which it belongs, 130.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decline of the ascetic and saintly qualities with civilisation, 130.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the ascetic movement, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its rapid extension, <ref target='Pg103'>103-105</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Penances attributed to the saints of
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
the desert, <ref target='Pg107'>107-109</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miseries and joys of the hermit life, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dislike of the monks to knowledge, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their hallucinations, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relations of female devotees with the anchorites, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ways in which the ascetic life affected both the ideal type and realised condition of morals, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Extreme animosity of the ascetics to everything pagan, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decline of the civic virtues caused by asceticism, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral effects of asceticism on self-sacrifice, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral beauty of some of the legends of the ascetics, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends of the connection between the saints and the animal world, <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical form of asceticism in the West, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of asceticism on chastity, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On marriage, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the estimate of women, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asella, story of her asceticism, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asia Minor, destruction of the churches of, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aspasia, the Athenian courtesan, ii. <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Asses, feast of, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Association, Hartley's doctrine of, i. 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Partly anticipated by Hutcheson and Gay, 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Illustrations of the system of association, 26-30.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The theory, how far selfish, 30.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The essential and characteristic feature of conscience wholly unaccounted for by the association of ideas, 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Astrology, belief in, rapidly gaining ground in the time of the elder Pliny, i. 171, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atticus, his suicide, i. 215, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustine, St., on original sin, i. 209.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His belief in contemporary miracles, 378.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the decline of the Roman empire, 410.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of virgin suicides, ii. <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Augustus, his solemn degradation of the statue of Neptune, i. 169.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His mode of discouraging celibacy, 232.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miraculous stories related of him, 258.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His superstition, 376.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Advice of Mæcenas to him, 399.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His consideration for the religious customs of the Jews, 406</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aulus Gellius, his account of the rhetoricians, i. 313.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared with Helvétius, 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aurelius, Marcus, on a future state, i. 184.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On posthumous fame, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Denied that all vices are the same, 192, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the sacred spirit dwelling in man, 198.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His submissive gratitude, 199.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His practical application of the precepts of the Stoics, 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His wavering views as to suicide, 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His charity to the human race, 241.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mild and more religious spirit of his stoicism, 245.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His constant practice of self-examination, 249.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His life and character, 249-255.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared and contrasted with Plutarch, 253.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His discouragement of the games of the arena, 286.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His humanity, 308.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His disbelief of exorcism, 384.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His law against religious terrorism, 422.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His persecution of the Christians, 439, 440.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His benevolence, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of war, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Austin, Mr., his view of the foundation of the moral law, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His advocacy of the unselfish view of the love we ought to bear to God, 18, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Character of his <q>Lectures on Jurisprudence,</q> 22, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avarice, association of ideas to the passion of, i. 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Avitus, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<lg>
<l>Babylas, St., miracles performed by his bones, i. 382, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His death, ii. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacchus, suppression of the rites of, at Rome, i. 401</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Lord, great movement of modern thought caused by, i. 125.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His objection to the Stoics' view of death, 202</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bacon, Roger, his life and works, ii. <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bain, Mr., on pleasure, i. 12, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 29, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Balbus, Cornelius, his elevation to the consulate, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baltus on the exorcists, i. 381, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Baptism, Augustinian doctrine of, i. 96</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Barbarians, causes of the conversion of the, i. 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Basil, St., his hospital, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His labours for monachism, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bassus, Ventidius, his elevation to the consulate, i. 232</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bathilda, Queen, her charity, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bear-gardens in England, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beauty, analogies between virtue and, i. 77.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their difference, 79.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Diversities existing in our judgments of virtue and beauty, 79.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of these diversities, 79.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virtues to which we can, and to which we cannot, apply the term beautiful, 82, 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pleasure derived from beauty compared with that from the grotesque, or eccentric, 85.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The prevailing cast of female beauty in the north, contrasted with the southern type, 144, 145, 152.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Admiration of the Greeks for beauty, ii. <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bees, regarded by the ancients as emblems or models of chastity, i. 108, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beggars, causes of vast numbers of, ii. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Old English laws for the suppression of mendicancy, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Enactments against them in various parts of Europe, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benedict, St., his system, 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benefices, military use of, ii. <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Benevolence; Hutcheson's theory that all virtue is resolved into benevolence, i. 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Discussions in England, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as to the existence of, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Various views of the source from which it springs, 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Association of ideas producing the feeling of, 26.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Hartley on benevolence quoted, 27, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Impossibility of benevolence becoming a pleasure if practised only with a view to that end, 37.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Application to benevolence of the theory, that the moral unity of different ages is a unity not of standard but of tendency, 100.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influenced by our imaginations, 132, 133.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Imperfectly recognised by the Stoics, 188, 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bentham, Jeremy, on the motives of human actions, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the pleasures and pains of piety quoted, 9, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On charity, 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On vice, 13, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the sanctions of morality, 19, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Throws benevolence as much as possible into the background, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Makes no use of the doctrine of association, 25, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 29, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On interest and disinterestedness, 32, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the value and purity of a pleasure, 90, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besarion, St., his penances, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Biography, relative importance of, among Christians and Pagans, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blandina, martyrdom of, i. 442</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blesilla, story of her slow suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Blondel, his denunciation of the forgeries of the Sibylline books, i. 377</l>
</lg>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<lg>
<l>Boadicea, her suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bolingbroke's <q>Reflections on Exile,</q> i. 201, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bona Dea, story and worship of, i. 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Popularity of her worship among the Romans, 106, 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boniface, St., his missionary labours, ii. <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bonnet, his philosophy, i. 71</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bossuet, on the nature of the love we should bear to God, i. 18, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brephotrophia, in the early church, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brotherhood, effect of Christianity in promoting, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brown, on the motive for the practice of virtue, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On theological Utilitarianism, 16, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brunehaut, Queen, her crimes, approved of by the Pope, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Her end, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brutus, his extortionate usury, i. 193, 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckle, Thomas, his remarks on morals, i. 74, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the difference between mental and physical pleasures, 90, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His views of the comparative influence of intellectual and moral agencies in civilisation, 103, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bull-baiting in England, ii. <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bulgarians, their conversion to Christianity, ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Butler, Bishop, maintains the reality of the existence of benevolence in our nature, i. 20, 21, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the pleasure derived from virtue, 32, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His analysis of moral judgments, 76.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Byzantine Empire, general sketch of the moral condition of the, ii. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral condition of the empire during the Christian period, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cædmon, story of the origin of his <q>Creation of the World,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cæsar, Julius, denies the immortality of the soul, i. 182.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of suicide, 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His colonial policy, 233.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His multiplication of gladiatorial shows, 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Caligula, his intoxication with his imperial dignity, i. 259.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His superstitious fears, 367</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Calvinists: tendency of the Supralapsarian to deny the existence of a moral sense, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Camma, conjugal fidelity of, ii. <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Capital punishment, aversion to, ii. <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carlyle, Thomas, on self-sacrifice, i. 57, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The influence of conscience on the happiness of men, 62</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carneades, his expulsion from Rome proposed by Cato, i. 399</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carpocrates, licentiousness of the followers of, i. 417</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthage, effect of the destruction of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Decian persecution at, 452</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Carthaginians, the, amongst the most prominent of Latin writers, i. 235</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cassius, the tyrannicide, his suicide, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Castellio, his exposure of the forgeries of the Sibylline books, i. 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catacombs, the, i. 453, 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholicism, Roman, the system of education adopted by, contrasted with that of the English public schools, i. 114.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conflict of the priests with political economists on the subject of early marriages, 114, 115.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The teaching of, on many points the extreme antithesis of that of the pagan philosophers, 208.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its view of death,
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
208, 210.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Little done by it for humanity to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence on despotism, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its total destruction of religious liberty, <ref target='Pg194'>194-199</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the indifference to truth manifested in its literature, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Protestantism contrasted with it, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cato, his refusal to consult the oracles, i. 165, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His stoicism, 185.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His inhumanity to his slaves, 193.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His study of the <q>Phædon</q> the night he committed suicide, 212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opposition to Greek philosophy, 231.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of pre-nuptial chastity, ii. 314</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cattle plague, theological notions respecting the, i. 356</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catullus, on the death of a sparrow, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cautinus, Bishop, his drunkenness, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celibacy among the ancients, i. 106.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Catholic monastic system, 107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How discouraged by Augustus, 232.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Celibacy the primal virtue of the Christians of the fourth and fifth centuries, ii. <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of this upon moral teaching, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the celibacy of the clergy, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celsus calls the Christians Sibyllists, i. 376.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And jugglers, 384</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Celts, Spanish, their worship of death, i. 206, 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of their passion for suicide, 207, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their lamentations on the birth of men, 207, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Censors, Roman, minute supervision of the, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Character, influence of, on opinion, i. 172.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Governed in a great measure by national circumstances, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chariot races, passion for, at Constantinople, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charity, a form of self-love, according to the Utilitarians, i. 9, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Impossibility of charity becoming a pleasure if practised only with a view to that end, 36.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charity of the Stoics, 191.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cicero's emphatic assertion of the duty, 240.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exertions of the Christians in the cause of charity, ii. <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Inadequate place given to this movement in history, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian charity, in what it consists, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Laws of the Romans, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pagan examples of charity, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Noble enthusiasm of the Christians in the cause of charity, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charity enjoined as a matter of justice, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theological notions of charity, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Evils of Catholic charity, <ref target='Pg093'>93-94</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends respecting the virtue, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charlemagne, his law respecting Sunday, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fascination exercised by him over the popular imagination, <ref target='Pg271'>271</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His polygamy, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles V., the Emperor, his law against beggars, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles Martel, his defeat of the Mohammedans, at Poictiers, ii. <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charondas, law of, on second marriages, ii. <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chastity, in Utilitarian systems, i. 12, 49.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sketch of the history of, 103-107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Catholic monastic system, 107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Modern judgments of, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cato's views, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mystical views, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Services of the ascetics in enforcing the duty of chastity, <ref target='Pg318'>318-320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Children, charge of murdering infants, among the early Christians, i. 417.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abortion, ii. <ref target='Pg020'>20-24</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Infanticide, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exposed children, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Institutions of the
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
Romans for the benefit of children, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chilon, his closing hours, i. 207</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cholera, theological notions respecting the, i. 356</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian and pagan virtues compared, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity; distinctions between the pagan and Christian conceptions of death, i. 208.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The importance of Christianity not recognised by pagan writers, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of this, 338.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Examination of the theory which ascribes part of the teaching of the later pagan moralists to Christian influence, 340.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theory which attributes the conversion of Rome to evidences of miracles, 346.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Opinion of the pagans about the credulity of the Christians, 347.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging historic miracles, 375.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And for judging prophecies, 376.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contemporary miracles represented as existing among them, 377.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian miracles had probably little weight with the pagans, 385.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Progress of Christianity to what due, 386, 387.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Singular adaptation of it to the wants of the time, 387.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Heroism it inspired, 390.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Explanation of the conversion of the Roman Empire, 393.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Account of the persecutions of the Christians, 395.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why the Christians were more persecuted than the Jews, 403, 406, 407.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The first cause of the persecution of the Christians, 406.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charges of immorality brought against them, 414.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Due in a great measure to Jews and heretics, 416, 417.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The disturbance of domestic life caused by female conversions, 418.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Antipathy of the Romans to every system which employed religious terrorism, 421.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Christian intolerance of pagan worship, 423.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of diversity of belief, 424-427.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the persecutions, 429.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nero's, 429.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Domitian's, 431.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of the Christians under the Antonines, 434.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Become profoundly obnoxious to the people, 436.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marcus Aurelius, 439, 440.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Introduction of Christianity into France, 442, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attitude of the rulers towards it from M. Aurelius to Decius, 451, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of the Church on the eve of the Decian persecution, 448.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gallus, 454.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Valerian, 454.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gallienus, 455.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Erection of churches in the Empire, 457.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persecutions of Diocletian and Galerius, 458.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>End of the persecutions, 463.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Massacre of Christians in Phrygia, 464.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral efficacy of the Christian sense of sin, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dark views of human nature not common in the early Church, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The penitential system, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Empire Christianity attained in eliciting disinterested enthusiasm, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Great purity of the early Christians, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The promise of the Church for many centuries falsified, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The first consequence of Christianity a new sense of the sanctity of human life, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence in the protection of infant life, <ref target='Pg020'>20-32</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In the suppression of gladiatorial shows, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its effect upon persecutions, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The penal code not lightened by it, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condemnation of suicide, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Second consequence of Christianity Teaches universal brotherhood, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Slavery, <ref target='Pg061'>61-66</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ransom of captives, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charity, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exertions of the Christians in the cause of charity, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their exertions when the Empire was
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
subverted, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theological notions concerning insanity, <ref target='Pg085'>85-90</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Almsgiving, <ref target='Pg090'>90-92</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beneficial effect of Christianity in supplying pure images to the imagination, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Summary of the philanthropic achievements of Christianity, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ways in which the ascetic mode of life affected both the ideal type and realised condition of morals, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the relations of Christianity to the civic virtues, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Improvements effected by Christianity in the morals of the people, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attitude of Christianity to the barbarians, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How it achieved their conversion, <ref target='Pg179'>179-181</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tendency of the barbarians to adulterate it, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends of the conflict between the old gods and the new faith, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fierce hatred of rival sects, and total destruction of religious liberty, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Polytheistic and idolatrous form of Christianity in mediæval times, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The doctrine of purgatory, <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Benefits conferred by the monasteries, <ref target='Pg243'>243-245</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The observance of Sunday, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of Christianity upon war, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Upon the consecration of secular rank, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Upon the condition of women, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Strong assertion of the equality of obligation in marriage, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of Christianity to the female virtues, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysippus on the immortality of the soul, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chrysostom, St., his labours for monachism, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His treatment of his mother, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cicero on the evidence of a Divine element within us, i. 56, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His conception of the Deity, 164.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opinion of the popular beliefs, 165.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instance of his love of truth, 176, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His desire for posthumous reputation, 185, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His declaration as to virtue concealing itself from the world, 185.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His belief in the immortality of the soul, 204.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of death, 205, 206.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His complacency on the approach of death, 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His conception of suicide, 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His maintenance of the doctrine of universal brotherhood, 240.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How he regarded the games of the arena, 285.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His friendship with his freedman Tiro, 323.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on charity, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His rules respecting almsgiving, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Circumcelliones, atrocities of the, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their custom of provoking martyrdom, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Civic virtues, predominance accorded to, in ancient ethics, i. 200</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Civilisation, refining influence of, on taste, i. 79.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pleasures of a civilised and semi-civilised society compared, 86.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of Mill and Buckle on the comparative influence of intellectual and moral agencies in, 102, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of education in diminishing cruelty, and producing charity, 134.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral enthusiasm appropriate to different stages of civilisation, 136.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increase of veracity with civilisation, 137.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each stage of civilisation specially appropriate to some virtue, 147</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clarke, on moral judgments, i. 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Classical literature, preservation of, ii. <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Manner in which it was regarded by the Church, <ref target='Pg200'>200-204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claudius, his delight in gladiatorial shows, i. 280.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His decree as to slaves, 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Claver, Father, his remark on some persons who had delivered a
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
criminal into the hands of justice, i. 41, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleanthes, his suicide, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clemency, Seneca's distinction between it and pity, i. 189</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clement of Alexandria, on the two sources of all the wisdom of antiquity, i. 344.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the Sibylline books, 376.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On wigs, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clemens, Flavius, put to death, i. 433</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cleombrotus, his suicide, i. 212, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clergy, corruption of the, from the fourth century, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Submission of the Eastern, but independence of the Western, clergy to the civil power, <ref target='Pg264'>264-268</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of their celibacy, <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Climate, effects of, in stimulating or allaying the passions, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clotaire, his treatment of Queen Brunehaut, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clotilda, her conversion of her husband, i. 410; ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Clovis, his conversion, i. 410; ii. <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gregory of Tours' account of his acts, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock-fighting among the ancients and moderns, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cock-throwing, ii. <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coemgenus, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, S. T., his remarks on the practice of virtue as a pleasure, i. 28, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His admiration for Hartley, 28, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the binding ground of the belief of God and a hereafter, i. 55, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colman, St., his animal companions, ii. <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His girdle, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colonies, Roman, the cosmopolitan spirit forwarded by the aggrandisement of the, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Colosseum, the, i. 275.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Games at the dedication of the, 280</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Columbanus, St., his missionary labours, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comedy, Roman, short period during which it flourished, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Comet, a temple erected by the Romans in honour of a, i. 367</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Commodus, his treatment of the Christians, i. 443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Compassion, theory that it is the cause of our acts of barbarity, i. 71, 72</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concubines, Roman, ii. <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Concupiscence, doctrine of the Fathers respecting, ii. <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Condillac, cause of the attractiveness of utilitarianism to, i. 71.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Connection with Locke, i. 122, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Confessors, power of the, in the early Church, i. 390, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congo, Helvétius, on a custom of the people of, i. 102, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conquerors, causes of the admiration of, i. 94, 95</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conscience, association of ideas generating, i. 28.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Recognised by the disciples of Hartley, 29.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Definitions of Hobbes, Locke, Bentham, and Bain, 29, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The rewards and punishments of conscience, 60-62.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unique position of, in our nature, 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>As defined by Cicero, the Stoics, St. Paul, and Butler, 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Consequences, remote, weakness of the utilitarian doctrine of, i. 42-44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Consolations,</q> literature of, leading topics of, i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Constantine, the Emperor, his foundation of the empire of the East, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His humane policy towards children, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His sanction of the gladiatorial shows, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His laws mitigating the severity of punishments, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His treatment of slaves, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His law
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
respecting Sunday, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Magnificence of his court at Constantinople, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Conventual system, effect of the suppression of the, on women, ii. <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cordeilla, or Cordelia, her suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corinth, effect of the conquest of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornelia, a vestal virgin, incident of her execution, ii. <ref target='Pg318'>318</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornelius, the bishop, martyrdom of, i. 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cornutus, his disbelief in a future state, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corporations, moral qualities of, i. 152</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Councils of the Church, character of the, ii. <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courtesans, Greek, ii. <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of their elevation, <ref target='Pg291'>291-294</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How regarded by the Romans, <ref target='Pg300'>300</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cousin, Victor, his criticism of the Scotch moralists, i. 74, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His objection against Locke, 75, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crantor, originates the literature of <q>Consolations,</q> i. 204</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cremutius Cordus, trial of, i. 448, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crime, value attached by the monks to pecuniary compensations for, ii. <ref target='Pg213'>213</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Catalogue of crimes of the seventh century, <ref target='Pg237'>237-239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criminals, causes of our indulgent judgment of, i. 135</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Critical spirit, the, destroyed by Neoplatonism, i. 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cromaziano, his history of suicide, i. 216, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cruelty, origin and varieties of, i. 132, 134.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cruelty to animals, utilitarian doctrine concerning, 46, 47</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Crusius, his adherence to the opinion of Ockham as to the foundation of the moral law, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cudworth, his analysis of moral judgments, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Culagium, a tax levied on the clergy, ii. <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cumberland, Bishop, his unselfish view of virtue, i. 19, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cynics, account of the later, i. 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyprian, St., his evasion of persecution by flight, i. 452.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His exile and martyrdom, 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cyzicus deprived of its freedom, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dæmons, Apuleius' disquisition on the doctrine of, i. 323.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The doctrine supersedes the Stoical naturalism, i. 331.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The dæmons of the Greeks and Romans, 380.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of the Christians, 382</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dale, Van, his denial of the supernatural character of the oracles, i. 374</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dead, Roman worship of the, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Death, calmness with which some men of dull and animal natures can meet, i. 89.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Frame of mind in which a man should approach death, according to Epictetus, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Preparation for death one of the chief ends of the philosophy of the ancients, 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bacon's objection to the Stoics' view of, 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Irish legend of the islands of life and death, 203.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The literature of <q>Consolations,</q> 204.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Death not regarded by the philosophers as penal, 205.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Popular terrors of death, 205, 206.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instances of tranquil pagan deaths, 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinctions between the pagan and Christian conceptions of death, 208</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Decius, persecution of the Christians under, i. 449, 450</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Defoe, Daniel, his tract against beggars, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Delphi, oracle of, its description of the best religion, i. 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Deogratias, his ransom of prisoners, ii. <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>

<lg>
<l>Despotism, Helvétius' remarks on the moral effects of, i. 129, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diagoras, his denial of the existence of the gods, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diodorus, the philosopher, his suicide, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dion Chrysostom, his denunciation of images of the Deity, i. 166, 167, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His life and works, 312</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dionysius of Halicarnassus, on the creed of the Romans, i. 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disinterestedness, Bentham's remarks on, quoted, i. 32, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Disposition, what constitutes, according to the theory of association, i. 30</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divination, a favourite subject of Roman ridicule, i. 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief of the ancients in, 363</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divorce, unbounded liberty of, among the Romans, ii. <ref target='Pg306'>306-308</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condemned by the Church, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Docetæ, their tenets, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dog-star, legend of the, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dolphin, legends of the, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domestic laws, Roman, changes in, i. 297, 298</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domestic virtues, destruction of the, by the ascetics, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domitian, his law respecting suicide, i. 219.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anecdote of his cruelty, 289.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His law as to slaves, 307.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His persecution of the Stoics and Christians, 431, 432</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domitilla, banishment of, i. 433</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Domnina, her suicide with her daughters, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Donatists, their intolerance, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dowry of women, rise of the, ii. <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref> and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dreams, opinions of the Romans concerning, i. 366, 367, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dumont, M., on vengeance quoted, i. 41, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Duty, theory of morals must explain what is, and the notion of there being such a thing as, i. 5.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Paley on the difference between it and prudence, 15, 16, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinction between natural duties and those resting on positive law, 93.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Duty a distinct motive, 180</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dwarfs, combats of, in the arena, i. 281</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Earthquakes, how regarded by the ancients, i. 369.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cause of persecutions of the Christians, 408</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Easter controversy, bitterness of the, ii. <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclectic school of philosophy, rise of the, i. 242.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its influence on the Stoics, 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eclipses, opinions of the ancients concerning, i. 366</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Education, importance ascribed to, by the theory of the association of ideas, i. 30.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrast between that adopted by the Catholic priesthood and that of the English public schools, 114.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its influence on the benevolent feelings, 133, 134.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Two distinct theories of, 187</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egypt, the cradle of monachism, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Mohammedan conquest of, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Triumphs of the Catholics in, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Egyptians, their reverence for the vulture, i. 108, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their kindness to animals, 289.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrast of the spirit of their religion with that of the Greeks, 324.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the Stoical and Egyptian pantheism, 325</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Elephants, legends of, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emperors, Roman, apotheosis of, i. 170, 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Endura, the Albigensian practice of, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>England, national virtues and vices
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
of, i. 153.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ancient amusements of, ii. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ephrem, St., his charity, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epictetus, his disbelief in a future state, i. 183.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His life and works, 184, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the frame of mind in which a man should approach death, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His views of the natural virtue of man, 198.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On suicide, 214, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 220.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On universal brotherhood, 254.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His stoicism tempered by a milder and more religious spirit, 245, 246.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on national religious beliefs, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicureans, their faith preserved unchanged at Athens, i. 128, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their scepticism, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman Epicureans, 162, 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Epicureanism the expression of a type of character different from Stoicism, 171, 172.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But never became a school of virtue in Rome, 175.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Destructive nature of its functions, 176.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Esteemed pleasure as the ultimate end of our actions, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Encouraged physical science, 193.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their doctrine as to suicide, 214, 215, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epicurus, the four canons of, i. 14.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vast place occupied by his system in the moral history of man, 171.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His character, 175, 176, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lucretius' praise of him, 197.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of death, 205.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Discovery of one of his treatises at Herculaneum, 205, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epidemics, theological notions respecting, i. 356</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epiphanius, St., his miraculous stories, i. 378.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His charges against the Gnostics, 417.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of him and St. Hilarius, ii. 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Epponina, story of her conjugal fidelity, ii. <ref target='Pg342'>342</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Error, the notion of the guilt of, ii. <ref target='Pg190'>190-193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Essenes, virginity their ideal of sanctity, i. 109, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euhemerus, his explanation of the legends, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphrates the Stoic, his answer to Pliny the Younger, i. 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Has permission from Hadrian to commit suicide, 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euphraxia, St., ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, beauty of the gentler virtues inculcated in the plays of, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, on the allegorical and mythical interpretations of paganism, i. 163, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His account of the Christian persecutions, i. 463</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eusebius, St., his penances, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Eustathius, condemnation of, by the council of Gangra, ii. <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evagrius, his inhumanity to his parents, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evil, views of Hobbes and the Utilitarians of the essence and origin of, i. 8-10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excellence, supreme, how far it is conducive to happiness, i. 56</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Excommunication, penalties of, ii. 7</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Executioners, always regarded as unholy, i. 41</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Exorcism, among the early Christians, i. 378, 380.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Origin of the notions of possession and exorcism, 380.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Jews the principal exorcists, 380.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief of the early Christians in, 382.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contempt of the pagans for it, 384.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ulpian's law against exorcists, 384.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Probable explanation of possession and exorcism, 385.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Speedy decline of exorcism, 385.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The practice probably had no appreciable influence in provoking persecution of the Christians, 420</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Experience, general statement of the doctrine which bases morals upon, i. 5</l>
</lg>

<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>

<lg>
<l>Fabianus, martyrdom of, i. 446</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fabiola, founded the first public hospital, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fabius, his self-sacrifice, i. 185</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fabius Pictor, his works written in Greek, i. 230</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Faculty, moral, the term, i. 75</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fairies, belief in, i. 348, 349</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fatalism, Æschylus the poet of, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Felicitas, St., her martyrdom, i. 444.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In prison, ii. 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fénelon, on the unselfish love we should bear to God, i. 18, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fetishism, latent, the root of a great part of our opinions, i. 350</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fidenæ, accident at the amphitheatre at, i. 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fights, sham, in Italy in the middle ages, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fire, regarded by the ancients as an emblem of virginity, i. 108, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fish, symbol of the early Christians, i. 376</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flamens of Jupiter, ii. <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Flora, games of, i. 276</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Forethought, brought into a new position by industrial habits, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Foundlings, hospitals for, ii. <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>In ancient times, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adversaries of, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>France, condition of, under the Merovingian kings, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Francis of Assisi, St., story of his death from asceticism, ii. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His kindness to animals, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Franks, cause of their conversion, i. 410</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frédégonde, Queen, her crimes, ii. <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedmen, influence of, at Rome, i. 233.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of the freedmen of the Romans, 236</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Frenchmen, the chief national virtues and causes of their influence in Europe, i. 152.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared with Anglo-Saxon nations, 153</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Friendship, Utilitarian view of, i. 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galerius, his persecution of the Christians, i. 458, 461.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His illness, 462.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relents towards the Christians, 462</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Galilæans, their indifference to death, i. 392, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gall, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His missionary labours, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallienus, proclaims toleration to the Christians, i. 455, 457</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gallus, the Emperor, persecutions of the Christians under, i. 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gambling-table, moral influence of the, i. 148</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gaul, introduction of Christianity into, i. 442.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Foundation of the monastic system in, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Long continuance of polygamy among the kings of, <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gay, his view of the origin of human actions, quoted, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His suggestion of the theory of association, 23, 24</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genseric, effect of his conquest of Africa upon Italy, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His capture of Rome, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>George of Cappadocia, his barbarity, ii. <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germanicus, the Emperor, fury of the populace with the gods, in consequence of the death of, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germanus, St., his charity, ii. <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Germany, conversion of, to Christianity, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marriage customs of the early Germans, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their chastity, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gervasius, St., recovery of his remains, i. 379.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Girdles of chastity, ii. <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gladiatorial shows, influence of Christianity on the suppression of, i. 34.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why the Romans saw nothing criminal in them, 101.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History and effect on the Romans of, 271-283.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How regarded by moralists and historians, 284.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The passion for them not inconsistent
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
with humanity in other spheres, 288.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gnostics, accusations against the, by the early Fathers, i. 417.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their tenets, ii. 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, the Utilitarian view of the goodness of, i. 9, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Question of the disinterestedness of the love we should bear to, 18.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Our knowledge of Him derived from our own moral nature, 55.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Early traces of an all-pervading soul of nature in Greece, 161, 162, 170.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Philosophic definitions of the Deity, 162, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pantheistic conception of, by the Stoics and Platonists, 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Recognition of Providence by the Roman moralists, 196.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Two aspects under which the Stoics worshipped the Divinity&mdash;providence and moral goodness, 198</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gods, the, of the ancients, i. 161, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Euhemerus' theory of the explanation of the prevailing legends of the gods, 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of Cicero of the popular beliefs, 165.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Opinions of the Stoics, of Ovid, and of Horace, 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nature of the gods of the Romans, 167.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decline of Roman reverence for the gods, 168, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Good, pleasure equivalent to, according to the Utilitarians, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gracchi, colonial policy of the, i. 233</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grazers, sect of, ii. <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greeks, ancient, their callous murder of children, i. 45, 46.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Low state of female morality among them.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their enforcement of monogamy, 104.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Celibacy of some of their priests and priestesses, 105.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Early traces of a religion of nature, 161.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Universal providence attributed to Zeus, 161.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scepticism of the philosophers, 161, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Importance of biography in the moral teaching of the, i. 74.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the teaching of the Roman moralists and the Greek poets, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On death, and future punishment, 205, 206.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Greek suicides, 212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gentleness and humanity of the Greek character, 227.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence on Roman character, 227, 228.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Greek spirit at first as far removed from cosmopolitanism as that of Rome, 228.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of Greek cosmopolitanism, 229.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Extent of Greek influence at Rome, 230.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gladiatorial shows among them, 276.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spirit of their religion contrasted with that of the Egyptians, 324.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their intolerance of foreign religions, 406.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition and fall of their empire of the East, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12-14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their practice of infanticide, <ref target='Pg025'>25-27</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their treatment of animals, <ref target='Pg164'>164</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their treatment of prisoners taken in war, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their marriage customs, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Women in the poetic age, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Peculiarity of Greek feelings on the position of women, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unnatural forms assumed by vice amongst them, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory the Great, his contempt for Pagan literature, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His attitude towards Phocas, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory of Nyssa, St., his eulogy of virginity, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gregory of Tours, manner in which he regarded events, ii. <ref target='Pg240'>240-242</ref>, <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grotesque, or eccentric, pleasure derived from the, compared with that from beauty, i. 85</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gundebald, his murders approved of by his bishop, ii. <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gunpowder, importance of the invention of, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Guy, Brother, his society for protection and education of children, ii. <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<lg>
<l>Hadrian, the Emperor, his view of suicide, i. 219.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gives Euphrates permission to destroy himself, 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His laws respecting slaves, 307.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His leniency towards Christianity, 438.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His benevolence, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hair, false, opinions of the Fathers on, ii. <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hall, Robert, on theological Utilitarianism, i. 15 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Happiness, the greatest, for the greatest number,</q> theory of the, i. 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The sole end of human actions, according to the Utilitarians, 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The best man seldom the happiest, 69.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mental compared with physical happiness, 87.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of health and temperament on happiness, 88, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hartley, his doctrine of association, i. 22.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Coleridge's admiration for him, 28, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On animal food, 48, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His attempt to evade the conclusion to which his view leads, quoted, 67, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 82</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hegesias, the orator of death, i. 215</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heliogabalus, his blasphemous orgies, i. 260</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hell, monkish visions of, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref> and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Glimpses of the infernal regions furnished by the <q>Dialogues</q> of St. Gregory, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Modern publications on this subject, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Helvétius, on the origin of human actions, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On customs of the people of Congo and Siam, 102, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared with Aulus Gellius, 313</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert, of Cherbury, Lord, his profession of the doctrine of innate ideas, i. 123</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hercules, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hereford, Nicholas of, his opposition to indiscriminate alms, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heresy, punishment of death for, i. 98; ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hermits. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> <ref target='Index-Ascetics'>Asceticism</ref>; <ref target='Index-Monastic'>Monasticism</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heroism, the Utilitarian theory unfavourable to, i. 66.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>War, the school of heroism, 173</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hilarius, St., legend of him and St. Epiphanius, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hildebrand, his destruction of priestly marriage, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hippopotamus, legend of the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Historical literature, scantiness of, after the fall of the Roman empire, ii. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hobbes, Thomas, his opinions concerning the essence and origin of virtue, i. 7, 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of the origin of human actions, quoted, 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on the goodness which we apprehend in God, quoted, 9, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And on reverence, 9, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On charity, 9, 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On pity, 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Review of the system of morals of his school, 11.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gives the first great impulse to moral philosophy in England, 19, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His denial of the reality of pure benevolence, 20, 21.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 29, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His theory of compassion, 72, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Holidays, importance of, to the servile classes, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer, his views of human nature and man's will, i. 196</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Horace, his ridicule of idols, i. 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His description of the just man, 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hospitality enjoined by the Romans, ii. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hospitals, foundation of the first, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human life, its sanctity recognised by Christianity, ii. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gradual acquirement of this sense, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>

<lg>
<l>Human nature, false estimate of, by the Stoics, i. 192</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hume, David, his theory of virtue, i. 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Misrepresented by many writers, 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His recognition of the reality of benevolence in our nature, 20, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His comment on French licentiousness in the eighteenth century, 50, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His analysis of the moral judgments, 76.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Lays the foundation for a union of the schools of Clarke and Shaftesbury, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humility, new value placed upon it by monachism, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hutcheson, Francis, his doctrine of a <q>moral sense,</q> i. 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Establishes the reality of the existence of benevolence in our nature, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His analysis of moral judgments, 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hypatia, murder of, ii. <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Iamblichus, his philosophy, i. 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ideas, confused association of. Question whether our, are derived exclusively from sensation or whether they spring in part from the mind itself, 122.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The latter theory represented by the Platonic doctrine of pre-existence, 122.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doctrine of innate ideas, 122</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Idols and idolatry, views of the Roman philosophers of, i. 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Discussion between Apollonius of Tyana and an Egyptian priest respecting, 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Idols forbidden by Numa, 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plutarch on the vanity of, 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignatius, St., his martyrdom, i. 438</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ignis fatuus, legend of the, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imagination, sins of, i. 44.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of the benevolent feelings to it, 132, 133.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Deficiency of imagination the cause of the great majority of uncharitable judgments, 134-136.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Feebleness of the imagination a source of legends and myths, 347.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Beneficial effects of Christianity in supplying pure images to the imagination, 299</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imperial system of the Romans, its effect on their morals, i. 257.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Apotheosis of the emperors, 257</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>India, ancient, admiration for the schools of, i. 229</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inductive, ambiguity of the term, as applied to morals, i. 73</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Industrial truth, characteristics of, i. 137.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of the promotion of industrial life upon morals, 139-140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infanticide, history of the practice of, ii. <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Efforts of the Church to suppress it, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman laws relating to, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of, in England, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infants, Augustinian doctrine of the damnation of unbaptised, i. 96.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Sacrament given to, in the early Church, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insanity, alleged increase of, ii. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theological notions concerning, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The first lunatic asylums, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Insurance societies among the poor of Greece and Rome, ii. <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intellectual progress, its relations to moral progress, i. 149-151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Interest, self-, human actions governed exclusively by, according to the Utilitarians, i. 7, 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Summary of the relations of virtue and public and private, 117</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Intuition, rival claims of, and utility to be regarded as the supreme regulator of moral distinctions, i. 1, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Various names by which the theory of intuition is known, 2, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of the moralists of the school of, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Summary of their objections to the Utilitarian theory, i. 69.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The intuitive school, 74, 75.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doctrines of Butler, Adam
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
Smith, and others, 76-77.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Analogies of beauty and virtue, 77.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinction between the higher and lower parts of our nature, 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral judgments, and their alleged diversities, 91.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>General moral principles alone revealed by intuition, 99.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Intuitive morals not unprogressive, 102, 103.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difficulty of both the intuitive and utilitarian schools in finding a fixed frontier line between the lawful and the illicit, 116, 117.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The intuitive and utilitarian schools each related to the general condition of society, 122.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their relations to metaphysical schools, 123, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And to the Baconian philosophy, 125.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrasts between ancient and modern civilisations, 126, 127.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical consequences of the opposition between the two schools, 127</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inventions, the causes which accelerate the progress of society in modern times, i. 126</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ireland, why handed over by the Pope to England, ii. <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irenæus, his belief that all Christians had the power of working miracles, i. 378</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Irish, characteristics of the, i. 138.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their early marriages and national improvidences, 146.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Absence of moral scandals among the priesthood, 146.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their legend of the islands of life and death, 203.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their missionary labours, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their perpendicular burials, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isidore, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Isis, worship of, at Rome, i. 387.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suppression of the worship, 402</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italians, characteristics of the, i. 138, 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Italy, gigantic development of mendicancy in, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Introduction of monachism into, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, the Apostle, Eusebius' account of him, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James, St., of Venice, his kindness to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jenyns, Soame, his adherence to the opinion of Ockham, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jerome, St., on exorcism, i. 382.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the clean and unclean animals in the ark, ii. <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Encouraged inhumanity of ascetics to their relations, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His legend of SS. Paul and Antony, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, their law regulating marriage and permitting polygamy, i. 103.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their treatment of suicides, 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of their manners and creed at Rome, 235, 337.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Became the principal exorcists, 380, 381, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spread of their creed in Rome, 386.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why they were persecuted less than the Christians, 402, 407.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How regarded by the pagans, and how the Christians were regarded by the Jews, 415.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Charges of immorality brought against the Christians by the Jews, 417.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Domitian's taxation of them, 432.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their views of the position of women, ii. <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Joffre, Juan Gilaberto, his foundation of a lunatic asylum in Valencia, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, St., at Patmos, i. 433</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John, St., of Calama, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>John XXIII., Pope, his crimes, ii. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, Dr., his adherence to the opinion of Ockham, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Julian, the Emperor, his tranquil death, i. 207, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Refuses the language of adulation, 259.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His attempt to resuscitate paganism, 331.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Attitude of the Church towards him, ii. <ref target='Pg261'>261</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Joy at his death, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>

<lg>
<l>Julien l'Hospitalier, St., legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jupiter Ammon, fountain of, deemed miraculous, i. 366, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justinian, his laws respecting slavery, ii. <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Justin Martyr, his recognition of the excellence of many parts of the pagan writings, i. 344.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the <q>seminal logos,</q> 344.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the Sibylline books, 376.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cause of his conversion to Christianity, 415.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His martyrdom, 441</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Juvenal, on the natural virtue of man, i. 197</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kames, Lord, on our moral judgments, i. 77.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Notices the analogies between our moral and æsthetical judgments, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>King's evil, ceremony of touching for the, i. 363, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Labienus, his works destroyed, i. 448, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lactantius, character of his treatise, i. 463</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lætorius, story of, i. 259</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laughing condemned by the monks of the desert, ii. <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, Roman, its relation to Stoicism, i. 294, 295.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its golden age not Christian, but pagan, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lawyers, their position in literature, i. 131, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Legacies forbidden to the clergy, ii. <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Power of making bequests to the clergy enlarged by Constantine, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leibnitz, on the natural or innate powers of man, i. 121, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leo the Isaurian, Pope, his compact with Pepin, ii. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Leonardo da Vinci, his kindness to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Licentiousness, French, Hume's comments on, i. 50, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Locke, John, his view of moral good and moral evil, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His theological utilitarianism, 16, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His view of the sanctions of morality, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His invention of the phrase <q>association of ideas,</q> 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His definition of conscience, 29, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cousin's objections against him, 75, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His refutation of the doctrine of a natural moral sense, 123, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rise of the sensual school out of his philosophy, 123, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Famous formulary of his school, 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lombard, Peter, character of his <q>Sentences,</q> ii. <ref target='Pg226'>226</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His visions of heaven and hell, <ref target='Pg228'>228</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Longinus, his suicide, i. 219</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Love terms Greek, in vogue with the Romans, i. 231, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucan, failure of his courage under torture, i. 194.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His sycophancy, 194.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His cosmopolitanism, 240</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucius, the bishop, martyrdom of, i. 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lucretius, his scepticism, i. 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His disbelief in the immortality of the soul, i. 182, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His praise of Epicurus, 197.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His suicide, 215.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On a bereaved cow, ii. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lunatic asylums, the first, ii. <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Luther's wife, her remark on the sensuous creed she had left, i. 52</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyons, persecution of the Christians at, i. 441</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macarius, St., miracle attributed to, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His penances, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of his visit to an enchanted garden, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Other legends of him, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macedonia, effect of the conquest of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mackintosh, Sir James, theory of morals advocated by, i. 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fascination
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
of Hartley's doctrine of association over his mind, 29</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrianus, persuades the Emperor Valerian to persecute the Christians, i. 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macrina Cælia, her benevolence to children, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Magdalen asylums, adversaries of, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mallonia, virtue of, ii. <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malthus, on charity, ii. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mandeville, his <q>Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue.</q> His thesis that <q>private vices are public benefits,</q> i. 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opposition to charity schools, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manicheans, their tenets, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their prohibition of animal food, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manilius, his conception of the Deity, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Manufactures, influence upon morals, i. 139</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcellinus, Tullius, his self-destruction, i. 222</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcia, mistress of Commodus, her influence in behalf of toleration to the Christians, i. 443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcian, St., legend of the visit of St. Avitus to him, ii. <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marcus, St., story of, and his mother, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marriage, how regarded by the Jews, Greeks, Romans, and Catholics, i. 103, 104.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Statius' picture of the first night of marriage, 107, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reason why the ancient Jews attached a certain stigma to virginity, 109.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conflict of views of the Catholic priest and the political economist on the subject of early marriages, 114.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Results in some countries of the difficulties with which legislators surround marriage, 144.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Early marriages the most conspicuous proofs of Irish improvidence, 144.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of asceticism on, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Notions of its impurity, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Second marriages, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marseilles, law of, respecting suicide, i. 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Epidemic of suicide among the women of, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martial, sycophancy of his epigrams, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martin of Tours, St., establishes monachism in Gaul, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Martyrdom, glories of, i. 390.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Festivals of the Martyrs, 390, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Passion for, 391.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Dissipation of the people at the festivals, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, St., of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mary, the Virgin, veneration of, ii. <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massilians, wine forbidden to women by the, i. 96, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maternal affection, strength of, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maurice, on the social penalties of conscience, i. 60, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mauricus, Junius, his refusal to allow gladiatorial shows at Vienna, i. 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maxentius, instance of his tyranny, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximilianus, his martyrdom, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximinus, Emperor, his persecution of the Christians, i. 446</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Maximus of Tyre, account of him and his discourses, i. 312.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His defence of the ancient creeds, 323.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical form of his philosophy, 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Medicine, possible progress of, i. 158, 159</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Melania, St., her bereavement, ii. <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Her pilgrimage through the Syrian and Egyptian hermitages, 120</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milesians, wine forbidden by the, to women, i. 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Military honour pre-eminent among the Romans, i. 172, 173.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the decadence of Roman military virtue, 268</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mill, J., on association, 25, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>

<lg>
<l>Mill, J. S., quoted, i. 29, 47, 90, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Minerva, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles, general incredulity on the subject of, at the present time, i. 346, 348.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miracles not impossible, 347.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Established by much evidence, 347.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The histories of them always decline with education, 348.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Illustration of this in the belief in fairies, 348.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conceptions of savages, 349.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legends, formation and decay of, 350-352.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Common errors in reasoning about miracles, 356.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Predisposition to the miraculous in some states of society, 362.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief of the Romans in miracles, 363-367.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging historic miracles, 375.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contemporary miracles believed in by the early Christians, 378.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exorcism, 378.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neither past nor contemporary Christian miracles had much weight upon the pagans, 378</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Missionary labours, ii. <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mithra, worship of, in Rome, i. 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mohammedans, their condemnation of suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their lunatic asylums, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their religion, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of their military triumphs on Christianity, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Molinos, his opinion on the love we should bear to God, condemned, i. 18, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Monastic'/>
<l>Monastic system, results of the Catholic monastic system, i. 107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suicide of monks, ii. 52.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exertions of the monks in the cause of charity, 84.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the monastic movement, 102.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the rapid propagation of it in the West, 183.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>New value placed by it on obedience and humility, 185, 269.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of it to the intellectual virtues, 188.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The monasteries regarded as the receptacles of learning, 199.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fallacy of attributing to the monasteries the genius that was displayed in theology, 208.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Other fallacies concerning the services of the monks, 208-212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Value attached by monks to pecuniary compensations for crime, 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of their corruption, 217.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Benefits conferred by the monasteries, 243</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monica, St., i. 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monogamy, establishment of, ii. <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monophysites, the cause, to some extent, of the Mohammedan conquest of Egypt, ii. <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montanists, their tenets, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral distinctions, rival claims of intuition and utility to be regarded as the supreme regulators of, i. 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral judgments, alleged diversities of, i. 91.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Are frequently due to intellectual causes, 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instances of this in usury and abortion, 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinction between natural duties and others resting on positive law, 93.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ancient customs canonised by time, 93.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anomalies explained by a confused association of ideas, 94, 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral perceptions overridden by positive religions, 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instances of this in transubstantiation and the Augustinian and Calvinistic doctrines of damnation, 96, 97.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>General moral principles alone revealed by intuition, 99.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The moral unity of different ages a unity not of standard but of tendency, 100.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Application of this theory to the history of benevolence, 100.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why acts regarded in one age as criminal are innocent in another, 101.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of Mill and Buckle on the comparative influence of intellectual and moral agencies in civilisation, 102, 103, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Intuitive morals not unprogressive, 102, 103.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Answers to miscellaneous
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
objections against the theory of natural moral perceptions, 109.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the condition of society on the standard, but not the essence, of virtue, 110.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Occasional duty of sacrificing higher duties to lower ones, 110, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Summary of the relations of virtue and public and private interest, 117.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Two senses of the word natural, 119</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral law, foundation of the, according to Ockham and his adherents, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Various views of the sanctions of morality, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Utilitarian theological sanctions, 53.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The reality of the moral nature the one great question of natural theology, 56.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Utilitarian secular sanctions, 57.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Utilitarian theory subversive of morality, 66.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plausibility and danger of theories of unification in morals, 72.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Our knowledge of the laws of moral progress nothing more than approximate or general, 136</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q>Moral sense,</q> Hutcheson's doctrine of a, i. 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Moral system, what it should be, to govern society, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morals, each of the two schools of, related to the general condition of society, i. 122.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their relations to metaphysical schools, 123, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And to the Baconian philosophy, 125.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrast between ancient and modern civilisations, 125-127.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes that lead societies to elevate their moral standard, and determine their preference of some particular kind of virtues, 130.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The order in which moral feelings are developed, 130.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Danger in proposing too absolutely a single character as a model to which all men must conform, 155.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Remarks on moral types, 156.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Results to be expected from the study of the relations between our physical and moral nature, 158.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Little influence of Pagan religions on morals, 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>More, Henry, on the motive of virtue, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Musonius, his suicide, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mutius, history of him and his son, ii. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mysticism of the Romans, causes producing, i. 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Myths, formation of, i. 351</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Naples, mania for suicide at, ii. <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Napoleon, the Emperor, his order of the day respecting suicide, i. 219, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nations, causes of the difficulties of effecting cordial international friendships, i. 156</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Natural moral perceptions, objections to the theory of, i. 116.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Two senses of the word natural, 118.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reid, Sedgwick, and Leibnitz on the natural or innate powers of man, 121, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Locke's refutation of the doctrine of a natural moral sense, 124</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neoplatonism, account of, i. 325.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its destruction of the active duties and critical spirit, 329</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Neptune, views of the Stoics of the meaning of the legends of, i. 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His statue solemnly degraded by Augustus, 169</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nero, his singing and acting, i. 259.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His law about slaves, 307.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His persecution of the Christians, 429</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Newman, Dr., on venial sin, i. 111, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> on pride, ii. <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nicodemus, apocryphal gospel of, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nilus, St., deserts his family, ii. <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nitria, number of anchorites in the desert of, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nolasco, Peter, his works of mercy,
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His participation in the Albigensian massacres, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Novatians, their tenets, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Numa, legend of his prohibition of idols, i. 166, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath, sanctity of an, among the Romans, i. 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obedience, new value placed on it by monachism, ii. <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Obligation, nature of, i. 64, 65</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ockham, his opinion of the foundation of the moral law, i. 17, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Odin, his suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O'Neale, Shane, his charity, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Opinion, influence of character on, i. 171, 172</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oracles, refuted and ridiculed by Cicero, i. 165.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plutarch's defence of their bad poetry, 165, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Refusal of Cato and the Stoics to consult them, 165.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ridiculed by the Roman wits, 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Answer of the oracle of Delphi as to the best religion, 167.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theory of the oracles in the 'De Divinatione' of Cicero, 368, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Van Dale's denial of their supernatural character, 374.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Books of oracles burnt under the republic and empire, 447, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Origen, his desire for martyrdom, i. 391</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Orphanotrophia, in the early Church, ii. <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Otho, the Emperor, his suicide, i. 219.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Opinion of his contemporaries of his act, 219, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, object of his <q>Metamorphoses,</q> i. 166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of suicide, 213, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His humanity to animals, ii. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxen, laws for the protection of, ii. <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oxyrinchus, ascetic life in the city of, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pachomius, St., number of his monks, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pætus and Arria, history of, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagan religions, their feeble influence on morals, i. 161</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pagan virtues, the, compared with Christian, i. 190</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paiderastia, the, of the Greeks, ii. <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pain, equivalent to evil, according to the Utilitarians, i. 8, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Palestine, foundation of monachism in, ii. <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Becomes a hot-bed of debauchery, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paley, on the obligation of virtue, i. 14, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the difference between an act of prudence and an act of duty, 16, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the love we ought to bear to God, 18, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the religious sanctions of morality, 19.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the doctrine of association, 25, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On flesh diet, 49, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the influence of health on happiness, 88, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the difference in pleasures, 90, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pambos, St., story of, ii. <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pammachus, St., his hospital, ii. <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Panætius, the founder of the Roman Stoics, his disbelief in the immortality of the soul, i. 183</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pandars, punishment of, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parents, reason why some savages did not regard their murder as criminal, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Parthenon, the, at Athens, i. 105</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pascal, his advocacy of piety as a matter of prudence, i. 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His adherence to the opinion of Ockham as to the foundation of the moral law, 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His thought on the humiliation created by deriving pleasure from certain amusements, i. 86, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patriotism, period when it flourished, i. 136.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Peculiar characteristic of the virtue, 177, 178.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the predominance occasionally accorded
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
to civic virtues, 200.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neglect or discredit into which they have fallen among modern teachers, 201.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cicero's remarks on the duty of every good man, 201.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unfortunate relations of Christianity to patriotism, ii. <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Repugnance of the theological to the patriotic spirit, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St., his definition of conscience, i. 83</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, the hermit, his flight to the desert, ii. <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of the visit of St. Antony to him, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paul, St. Vincent de, his foundling hospitals, ii. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paula, story of her asceticism and inhumanity, ii. <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paulina, her devotion to her husband, ii. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagia, St., her suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Her flight to the desert, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelagius, ii. <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pelican, legend of the, ii. <ref target='Pg161'>161</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penances of the saints of the desert, ii. <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Penitential system, the, of the early church, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepin, his compact with Pope Leo, ii. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peregrinus the Cynic, his suicide, i. 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pericles, his humanity, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perpetua, St., her martyrdom, i. 391, 444; ii. <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Persecutions, Catholic doctrines justifying, i. 98.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Why Christianity was not crushed by them, 395.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Many causes of persecution, 395-397.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why the Christians were more persecuted than the Jews, 403, 406, 407.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the persecutions, 406, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the persecutions, 429.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nero, 429.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Domitian, 431.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Trajan, 437.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marcus Aurelius, 439, 440.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>From M. Aurelius to Decius, 442, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Gallus, 454.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Valerian, 454.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Diocletian and Galerius, 458-463.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>End of the persecutions, 463.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>General considerations on their history, 463-468</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petronian law, in favour of slaves, i. 307</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Petronius, his scepticism, i. 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His suicide, 215.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of the show of the arena, 286</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philip the Arab, his favour to Christianity, i. 445</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophers, efforts of some, to restore the moral influence of religion among the Romans, i. 169.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The true moral teachers, 171</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophical truth, characteristics of, i. 139, 140.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its growth retarded by the opposition of theologians, 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, causes of the practical character of most ancient, i. 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its fusion with religion, 352.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Opinions of the early Church concerning the pagan writings, 332.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the moral teaching of a philosophy and that of a religion, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its impotency to restrain vice, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocas, attitude of the Church towards him, ii. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phocion, his gentleness, i. 228</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Physical science affects the belief in miracles, i. 354, 355</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Piety, utilitarian view of the causes of the pleasures and pains of, i. 9, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>A matter of prudence, according to theological Utilitarianism, 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilate, Pontius, story of his desire to enrol Christ among the Roman gods, i. 429</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pilgrimages, evils of, ii. <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pior, St., story of, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pirates, destruction of, by Pompey, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>

<lg>
<l>Pity, a form of self-love, according to some Utilitarians, i. 9, 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Adam Smith's theory, 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Seneca's distinction between it and clemency, 189.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Altar to Pity at Athens, 228.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of Marcus Aurelius' altar to Beneficentia at Rome, 228, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plato, his admission of the practice of abortion, i. 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Basis of his moral system, 105.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cause of the banishment of the poets from his republic, 161, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His theory that vice is to virtue what disease is to health, 179, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reason for his advocacy of community of wives, 200.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of suicide, 212, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on universal brotherhood, 241.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platonic school, its ideal, i. 322</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Platonists, their more or less pantheistic conception of the Deity, i. 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical nature of their philosophy, 329.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Platonic ethics ascendant in Rome, 331</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pleasure the only good, according to the Utilitarians, i. 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Illustrations of the distinction between the higher and lower parts of our nature in our pleasures, 83-85.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Pleasures of a civilised compared with those of a semi-civilised society, 86.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Comparison of mental and physical pleasures, 87, 88.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinction in kind of pleasure, and its importance in morals, 89-91.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neglected or denied by Utilitarian writers, 89, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, the elder, on the probable happiness of the lower animals, i. 87, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the Deity, 164.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On astrology, 171, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 164, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His disbelief in the immortality of the soul, 182.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His advocacy of suicide, 215.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Never mentions Christianity, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opinion of earthquakes, 369.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of comets, 369.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His facility of belief, 370.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His denunciation of finger rings, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pliny, the younger, his desire for posthumous reputation, i. 185, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His picture of the ideal of Stoicism, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His letter to Trajan respecting the Christians, 437.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His benevolence, 242; ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plotinus, his condemnation of suicide, i. 214.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His philosophy, 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Plutarch, his defence of the bad poetry of the oracles, 165, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His mode of moral teaching, 175.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Basis of his belief in the immortality of the soul, 204.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On superstitious fear of death, 206.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His letter on the death of his little daughter, 242.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>May justly be regarded as the leader of the eclectic school, 243.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His philosophy and works compared with those of Seneca, 243.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His treatise on <q>The Signs of Moral Progress,</q> 249.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared and contrasted with Marcus Aurelius, 253.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How he regarded the games of the arena, 286.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His defence of the ancient creeds, 322.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Practical nature of his philosophy, 329.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Never mentions Christianity, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on the domestic system of the ancients, 419.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On kindness to animals, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His picture of Greek married life, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pluto, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Po, miracle of the subsidence of the waters of the, i. 382, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pœmen, St., story of, and of his mother, ii. <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of him and the lion, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Political economy, what it has accomplished respecting almsgiving, ii. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>

<lg>
<l>Political judgments, moral standard of most men in, lower than in private judgments, i. 151</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Political truth, or habit of <q>fair play,</q> the characteristic of free communities, i. 139.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Highly civilised form of society to which it belongs, 139.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its growth retarded by the opposition of theologians, 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polybius, his praise of the devotion and purity of creed of the Romans, i. 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polycarp, St., martyrdom of, i. 441</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Polygamy, long continuance of, among the kings of Gaul, ii. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pompeii, gladiatorial shows at, i. 276, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pompey, his destruction of the pirates, i. 234.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His multiplication of gladiatorial shows, 273</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poor-law system, elaboration of the, ii. <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its pernicious results, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Poppæa, Empress, a Jewish proselyte, i. 386</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porcia, heroism of, ii. <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Porphyry, his condemnation of suicides, i. 214.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His description of philosophy, i. 326.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His adoption of Neoplatonism, i. 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Possevin, his exposure of the Sibylline books, i. 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pothinus, martyrdom of, i. 442</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Power, origin of the desire of, i. 23, 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Praise, association of ideas leading to the desire for even posthumous, i. 26</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, reflex influence upon the minds of the worshippers, i. 36</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Preachers, Stoic, among the Romans, i. 308, 309</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pride, contrasted with vanity, i. 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The leading moral agent of Stoicism, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prometheus, cause of the admiration bestowed upon, i. 35</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecies, incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging prophecies, i. 376</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prophecy, gift of, attributed to the vestal virgins of Rome, i. 107.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And in India to virgins, 107, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prosperity, some crimes conducive to national, i. 58</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prostitution, ii. <ref target='Pg282'>282-286</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How regarded by the Romans, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protagoras, his scepticism, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protasius, St., miraculous discovery of his remains, i. 379</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prudentius, on the vestal virgins at the gladiatorial shows, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Purgatory, doctrine of, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232-235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pythagoras, sayings of, i. 53.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Chastity the leading virtue of his school, 106.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the fables of Hesiod and Homer, 161.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His belief in an all-pervading soul of nature, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His condemnation of suicide, 212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Tradition of his journey to India, 229, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His opinion of earthquakes, 369.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His doctrine of kindness to animals, ii. 165</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quakers, compared with the early Christians, ii. <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Quintilian, his conception of the Deity, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rank, secular, consecration of, ii. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rape, punishment for, ii. <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Redbreast, legend of the, ii. <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Regulus, the story of, i. 212</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reid, basis of his ethics, i. 76.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His distinction between innate faculties evolved by experience and
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
innate ideas independent of experience, 121, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, theological utilitarianism subverts natural, i. 54-56.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Answer of the oracle of Delphi as to the best, 167.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the moral teaching of a philosophy and that of a religion, ii. <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relations between positive religion and moral enthusiasm, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religions, pagan, their small influence on morals, i. 161.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Oriental, passion for, among the Romans, 318</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious liberty totally destroyed by the Catholics, ii. <ref target='Pg194'>194-199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repentance for past sin, no place for, in the writings of the ancients, i. 195</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reputation, how valued among the Romans, i. 185, 186</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Resurrection of souls, belief of the Stoics in the, i. 164</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revenge, Utilitarian notions as to the feeling of, i. 41, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Circumstances under which private vengeance is not regarded as criminal, i. 101</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reverence, Utilitarian views of, i. 9, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the diminution of the spirit of, among mankind, 141, 142</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rhetoricians, Stoical, account of the, of Rome, i. 310</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ricci, his work on Mendicancy, ii. <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rochefoucauld La, on pity, quoted, i. 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And on friendship, 10, 11, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rogantianus, his passive life, i. 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Roman law, its golden age not Christian, but pagan, ii. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romans, abortion how regarded by the, i. 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their law forbidding women to taste wine, 93, 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons why they did not regard the gladiatorial shows as criminal, 101.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their law of marriage and ideal of female morality, 104.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their religious reverence for domesticity, 106.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Sanctity of, and gifts attributed to, their vestal virgins, 106.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Character of their cruelty, 134.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared with the modern Italian character in this respect, 134.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Scepticism of their philosophers, 162-167.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The religion of the Romans never a source of moral enthusiasm, 167.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its characteristics, 168.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the disappearance of the religious reverence of the people, 169.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Efforts of some philosophers and emperors to restore the moral influence of religion, 169.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Consummation of Roman degradation, 170.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief in astrological fatalism, 170, 171.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The stoical type of military and patriotic enthusiasm pre-eminently Roman, 172-174, 178.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Importance of biography in their moral teaching, 178.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Epicureanism never became a school of virtue among them, 175.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unselfish love of country of the Romans, 178.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Character of Stoicism in the worst period of the Roman Empire, 181.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Main features of their philosophy, 185, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the Roman moralists and the Greek poets, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The doctrine of suicide the culminating point of Roman Stoicism, 222.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The type of excellence of the Roman people, 224, 225.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrast between the activity of Stoicism and the luxury of Roman society, 225, 226.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Growth of a gentler and more cosmopolitan spirit in Rome, 227.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of this change, 228, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Extent of Greek influence at Rome, 228.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The cosmopolitan spirit strengthened by the destruction of the power of the aristocracy, 231, 232.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
of the influence of freedmen in the state, 233.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the aggrandisement of the colonies, the attraction of many foreigners to Rome, and the increased facilities for travelling, on the cosmopolitan spirit, 233, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Foreigners among the most prominent of Latin writers, 235.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Results of the multitudes of emancipated slaves, 235, 236.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Endeavours of Roman statesmen to consolidate the empire by admitting the conquered to the privileges of the conquerors, 238.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Stoical philosophy quite capable of representing the cosmopolitan spirit, 239.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of eclectic philosophy on the Roman Stoics, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Life and character of Marcus Aurelius, 249-255.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Corruption of the Roman people, 255.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of their depravity, 256.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decadence of all the conditions of republican virtue, 256.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of the Imperial system on morals, 257-261.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Apotheosis of the emperors, 257.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral consequences of slavery, 262.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increase of idleness and demoralising employments, 262.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increase also of sensuality, 263.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Destruction of all public spirit, 264.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The interaction of many states which in new nations sustains national life prevented by universal empire, 264.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The decline of agricultural pursuits, 265.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of the military virtues, 268.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History and effects of the gladiatorial shows, 271.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Other Roman amusements, 276.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of the arena upon the theatre, 277.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nobles in the arena, 283.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of Stoicism on the corruption of society, 291.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman law greatly extended by it, 294.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Change in the relation of Romans to provincials, 297.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Changes in domestic legislation, 297.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman slavery, 300-308.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Stoics as consolers, advisers, and preachers, 308.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Cynics and rhetoricians, 309, 310.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decadence of Stoicism in the empire, 317.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the passion for Oriental religions, 318-320.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neoplatonism, 325.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Review of the history of Roman philosophy, 332-335.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the conversion of Rome to Christianity, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>State of Roman opinion on the subject of miracles, 365.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Progress of the Jewish and Oriental religions in Rome, 386, 387.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The conversion of the Roman empire easily explicable, 393.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Review of the religious policy of Rome, 397.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its division of religion into three parts, according to Eusebius, 403.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Persecutions of the Christians, 406, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Antipathy of the Romans to every religious system which employed religious terrorism, 420.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>History of the persecutions, 429.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>General sketch of the moral condition of the Western Empire, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rise and progress of the government of the Church of Rome, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman practice of infanticide, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relief of the indigent, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distribution of corn, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Exertions of the Christians on the subversion of the empire, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Inadequate place given to this movement, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Horrors caused by the barbarian invasions prevented to some extent by Christian charity, <ref target='Pg081'>81-84</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of Christianity in hastening the fall of the empire, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman treatment of prisoners of war, <ref target='Pg256'>256-258</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Despotism of the pagan empire, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of women under the Romans, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their concubines, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>

<lg>
<l>Rome, an illustration of crimes conducive to national prosperity, i. 58, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conversion of, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Three popular errors concerning its conversion, 339.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Capture of the city by the barbarians, ii. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Romuald, St., his treatment of his father, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rope-dancing of the Romans, i. 291</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sabinus, Saint, his penances, ii. <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sacrament, administration of the, in the early Church, ii. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Salamis, Brutus' treatment of the citizens of, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sallust, his stoicism and rapacity, i. 194</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sanctuary, right of, accorded to Christian churches, ii. <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Savage, errors into which the deceptive appearances of nature doom him, i. 54.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>First conceptions formed of the universe, 349.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The ethics of savages, 120, 121</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scepticism of the Greek and Roman philosophers, i. 162-166.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of, on intellectual progress, ii. <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scholastica, St., the legend of, ii. <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scifi, Clara, the first Franciscan nun, ii. <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sectarian animosity, chief cause of, i. 134</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sedgwick, Professor, on the expansion of the natural or innate powers of men, i. 121, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sejanus, treatment of his daughter by the senate, i. 107, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-denial, the Utilitarian theory unfavourable to, i. 66</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-examination, history of the practice of, i. 247-249</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Self-sacrifice, asceticism the great school of, ii. <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seneca, his conception of the Deity, i. 163, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 164.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His distinction between the affections and diseases, 189, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And between clemency and pity, 189.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His virtues and vices, i. 194.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the natural virtue of man and power of his will, 197.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On the Sacred Spirit dwelling in man, 198.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On death, 205.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His tranquil end, 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Advocates suicide, 213, 220.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His description of the self-destruction of a friend, 222.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remarks on universal brotherhood, 241.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His stoical hardness tempered by new doctrines, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His practice of self-examination, 248.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His philosophy and works compared with those of Plutarch, 243, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How he regarded the games of the arena, 286.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His exhortations on the treatment of slaves, 306.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Never mentions Christianity, 336.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Regarded in the middle ages as a Christian, 340.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On religious beliefs, 405</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sensuality, why the Mohammedans people Paradise with images of, i. 108.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Why some pagans deified it, 108.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Fallacy of judging the sensuality of a nation by the statistics of its illegitimate births, 144.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of climate upon public morals, 144.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of large towns, 145.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of early marriages, 146.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Absence of moral scandals among the Irish priesthood, 146, 147.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Speech of Archytas of Tarentum on the evils of, 200, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increase of sensuality in Rome, 263.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abated by Christianity, ii. <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The doctrine of the Fathers respecting concupiscence, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Serapion, the anthropomorphite, i. 52.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Number of his monks, ii. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His interview with the courtesan, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<lg>
<l>Sertorius, his forgery of auspicious omens, i. 166.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Alexander, refuses the language of adulation, i. 259.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His efforts to restore agricultural pursuits, 267.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Murder of, 444.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His leniency towards Christianity, 444.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His benevolence, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Cassius, exile of, i. 448, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Severus, Septimus, his treatment of the Christians, i. 443</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sextius, his practice of self-examination, i. 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shaftesbury, maintains the reality of the existence of benevolence in our nature, i. 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On virtue, 76, 77</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sibylline books, forged by the early Christians, i. 376, 377</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silius Italicus, his lines commemorating the passion of the Spanish Celts for suicide, i. 207, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His self-destruction, 221</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silvia, her filthiness, ii. <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem, his martyrdom, i. 438</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simeon Stylites, St., his penance, ii. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His inhumanity to his parents, ii. <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sin, the theological doctrine on the subject, i. 111, 112.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conception of sin by the ancients, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Original, taught by the Catholic Church, 209, 210.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Examination of the Utilitarian doctrine of the remote consequences of secret sins, 43, 44</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sisoes, the abbot, stories of, ii. <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, his martyrdom, i. 455</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sixtus V., Pope, his efforts to suppress mendicancy, ii. <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Slavery, circumstances under which it has been justified, i. 101.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Origin of the word servus, 102, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Crusade of England against, 153.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Character of that of the Romans, 235.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral consequence of slavery, 262.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Three stages of slavery at Rome, 300.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Review of the condition of slaves, 300-306.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Opinion of philosophers as to slavery, 306.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Laws enacted in favour of slaves, 306.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of Christianity upon the institution of slavery, ii. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Consecration of the servile virtue, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Impulse given to manumission, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Serfdom in Europe, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Extinction of slavery in Europe, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Ransom of captives, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smith, Adam, his theory of pity, quoted, i. 10, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His recognition of the reality of benevolence in our nature, 20.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His analysis of moral judgment, 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Smyrna, persecution of the Christians at, i. 441</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socrates, his view of death, i. 205.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His closing hours, 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His advice to a courtesan, ii. <ref target='Pg296'>296</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul, the immortality of the, resolutely excluded from the teaching of the Stoics, i. 181.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Character of their first notions on the subject, 182.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The belief in the reabsorption of the soul in the parent Spirit, 183.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief of Cicero and Plutarch in the immortality of the, 204.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>But never adopted as a motive by the Stoics, 204.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increasing belief in the, 331.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Vague belief of the Romans in the, 168</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sospitra, story of, i. 373</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spain, persecution of the Christians in, i. 461.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Almost complete absence of infanticide in, ii. <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The first lunatic asylums in Europe established in, <ref target='Pg089'>89</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spaniards, among the most prominent of Latin writers, i. 235.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their suicides, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Spartans, their intense patriotism, i. 178.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their legislature continually extolled as a model, 201.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of their women, ii. <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>

<lg>
<l>Spinoza, his remark on death, i. 203</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Anecdote of him, 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Staël, Madame de, on suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Statius, on the first night of marriage, i. 107, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stewart, Dugald, on the pleasures of virtue, i. 32, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stilpo, his scepticism and banishment, i. 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His remark on his ruin, 191.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stoics, their definition of conscience, i. 83.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their view of the animation of the human fœtus, 92.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their system of ethics favourable to the heroic qualities, 128.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Historical fact in favour of the system, 128.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their belief in an all-pervading soul of nature, 162.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their pantheistic conception of the Deity, 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their conception and explanation of the prevailing legends of the gods, 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their opinion as to the final destruction of the universe by fire, and the resuscitation of souls, 164.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their refusal to consult the oracles, 165.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stoicism the expression of a type of character different from Epicureanism, 172.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rome pre-eminently the home of Stoicism, 172.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Account of the philosophy of the Stoics, 177.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Its two essentials&mdash;the unselfish ideal and the subjugation of the affections to the reason, 177.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The best example of the perfect severance of virtue and interest, 181.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their views concerning the immortality of the soul, 182-184.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Taught men to sacrifice reputation, and do good in secret, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And distinguished the obligation from the attraction of virtue, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Taught also that the affections must be subordinate to the reason, 187-191.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their false estimate of human nature, 192.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their love of paradox, 192.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Imperfect lives of many eminent Stoics, 193.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their retrospective tendencies, 193.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their system unfitted for the majority of mankind, 194.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Compared with the religious principle, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The central composition of this philosophy, the dignity of man, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>High sense of the Stoics of the natural virtue of man, and of the power of his will, 195, 196.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their recognition of Providence, 196.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The two aspects under which they worshipped God, 198.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Stoics secured from quietism by their habits of public life, 199-201.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their view of humanity, 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their preparations for, and view of, death, 202.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their teaching as to suicide, 212, 213, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Contrast between Stoicism and Roman luxury, 225, 226.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Stoical philosophy quite capable of representing the cosmopolitan spirit, 239, 240.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stoicism not capable of representing the softening movement of civilisation, 241.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of the eclectic spirit on it, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stoicism becomes more essentially religious, 245.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Increasingly introspective character of later Stoicism, 247.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marcus Aurelius the best example of later Stoicism, 249-255.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of Stoicism on the corruption of Roman Society, 291, 292.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It raised up many good Emperors, 292.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It produced a noble opposition under the worst Emperors, 293.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>It greatly extended Roman law, 294.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Stoics considered as the consolers of the suffering, advisers of the young, and as popular preachers, 308.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rapid decadence of Stoicism, 317, 318.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between the Stoical and Egyptian pantheism, 324.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stoical naturalism superseded by the theory of dæmons, 331.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theory that the writings of the Stoics
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
were influenced by Christianity examined, 332.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Domitian's persecution of them, 432</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Strozzi, Philip, his suicide, ii. <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suffering, a courageous endurance of, probably the first form of virtue in savage life, i. 130</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Suicide, attitude adopted by Pagan philosophy and Catholicism towards, i. 211, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eminent suicides, 215.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Epidemic of suicides at Alexandria, 216.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of girls at Miletus, 216, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Grandeur of the Stoical ideal of suicide, 216.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influences conspiring towards suicide, 217.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Seneca on self-destruction, 217, 218, 220.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Laws respecting it, 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Eminent instances of self-destruction, 219, 221.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The conception of, as an euthanasia, 221.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Neoplatonist doctrine concerning, 331.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the Christian condemnation of the practice of, ii. <ref target='Pg043'>43-61</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Theological doctrine on, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The only form of, permitted in the early Church, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Slow suicides, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Circumcelliones, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Albigenses, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suicides of the Jews, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Treatment of corpses of suicides, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Authorities for the history of suicides, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reaction against the mediæval laws on the subject, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Later phases of its history, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Self-destruction of witches, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Epidemics of insane suicide, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cases of legitimate suicide, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suicide in England and France, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sunday, importance of the sanctity of the, ii. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Laws respecting it, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Superstition, possibility of adding to the happiness of man by the diffusion of, i. 50-53.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Natural causes which impel savages to superstition, i. 55.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Signification of the Greek word for, 205</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swan, the, consecrated to Apollo, i. 206</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sweden, cause of the great number of illegitimate births in, i. 144</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swinburne, Mr., on annihilation, i. 182, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symmachus, his Saxon prisoners, i. 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Synesius, legend of him and Evagrius, ii. <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Refuses to give up his wife, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syracuse, gladiatorial shows at, i. 275</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tacitus, his doubts about the existence of Providence, i. 171, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telemachus, the monk, his death in the arena, ii. <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Telesphorus, martyrdom of, i. 446, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertia Æmilia, story of, ii. <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tertullian, his belief in dæmons, i. 382.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And challenge to the Pagans, 383</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Testament, Old, supposed to have been the source of pagan writings, i. 344</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thalasius, his hospital for blind beggars, ii. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theatre, scepticism of the Romans extended by the, i. 170.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of the gladiatorial shows upon the, 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theft, reasons why some savages do not regard it as criminal, i. 102.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Spartan law legalising it, 102</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodebert, his polygamy, ii. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodoric, his court at Ravenna, ii. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodorus, his denial of the existence of the gods, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodorus, St., his inhumanity to his mother, ii. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theodosius the Emperor, his edict forbidding gladiatorial shows, ii. <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Denounced by the Ascetics, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His law respecting Sunday, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>

<lg>
<l>Theological utilitarianism, theories of, i. 14-17</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology, sphere of inductive reasoning in, 357</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theon, St., legend of, and the wild beasts, ii. <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theurgy rejected by Plotinus, i. 330.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All moral discipline resolved into, by Iamblichus, 330</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrace, celibacy of societies of men in, i. 106</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrasea, mildness of his Stoicism, i. 245</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thrasea and Aria, history of, ii. <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Thriftiness created by the industrial spirit, i. 140</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tiberius the Emperor, his images invested with a sacred character, i. 260.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His superstitions, 367, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Timagenes, exiled from the palace by Tiberius, i. 448, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Titus, the Emperor, his tranquil end, i. 207.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Instance of his amiability, 287</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tooth-powder, Apuleius' defence of, ii. <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torments, future, the doctrine of, made by the monks a means of extorting money, ii. <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Monastic legends of, 220</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tragedy, effects of the gladiatorial shows upon, among the Romans, i. 277</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trajan, the Emperor, his gladiatorial shows, i. 287.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Letter of Pliny to, respecting the Christians, 437.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Trajan's answer, 437.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His benevolence to children, ii. <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legend of St. Gregory and the Emperor, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Transmigration of souls, doctrine of, of the ancients, ii. <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Travelling, increased facilities for, of the Romans, i. 234</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Trinitarian monks, their works of mercy, ii. <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Troubadours, one of their services to mankind, ii. <ref target='Pg232'>232</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>'Truce of God,' importance of the, ii. <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truth, possibility of adding to the happiness of men by diffusing abroad, or sustaining, pleasing falsehoods, i. 52.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Saying of Pythagoras, 53.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Growth of, with civilisation, 137.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Industrial, political, and philosophical, 137-140.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of monachism to the abstract love of truth, ii. <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Causes of the mediæval decline of the love of truth, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tucker, his adoption of the doctrine of the association of ideas, i. 25, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turks, their kindness to animals, i. 289</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Types, moral, i. 156.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All characters cannot be moulded in one type, 158</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ulpian on suicide, i. 218, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unselfishness of the Stoics, i. 177</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Usury, diversities of moral judgment respecting, i. 92</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utilitarian school. <hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Morals; Virtue; Vice</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Utility, rival claims of, and intuition to be regarded as the supreme regulators of moral distinctions, i. 1, 2.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Various names by which the theory of utility is known, 3.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of the moralists of the school of, 3, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerian, his persecutions of the Christians, i. 454</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Valerius Maximus, his mode of moral teaching, i. 174</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vandals, their conquest of Africa, ii. <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Varro, his conception of the Deity,
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
i. 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On popular religious beliefs, 167</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Venus, effect of the Greek worship of, on the condition of women, ii. <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vespasian, his dying jest, i. 259.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of his frugality on the habits of the Romans, 292.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Miracle attributed to him, 347.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His treatment of philosophers, 448, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vice, Mandeville's theory of the origin of, i. 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And that <q>private vices were public benefits,</q> 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of the Utilitarians as to, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The degrees of virtue and vice do not correspond to the degrees of utility, or the reverse, 40-42.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The suffering caused by vice not proportioned to its criminality, 57-59.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plato's ethical theory of virtue and vice, 179.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Grote's summary of this theory, 179, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conception of the ancients of sin, 195.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Moral efficacy of the Christian sense of sin, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, his conception of the Deity, i. 163.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His epicurean sentiment, 193, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>On suicide, 213.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His interest in animal life, ii. <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virginity, how regarded by the Greeks, i. 105.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Æschylus' prayer to Athene, 105.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Bees and fire emblems of virginity, 108, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reason why the ancient Jews attached a certain stigma to virginity, 109.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of Essenes, 109</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgins, Vestal, sanctity and gifts attributed to the, i. 106, 107, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Executions of, 407, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reasons for burying them alive, ii. <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>How regarded by the Romans, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virtue, Hume's theory of the criterion, essential element, and object of, i. 4.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Motive to virtue according to the doctrine which bases morals upon experience, 6.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Mandeville's the lowest and most repulsive form of this theory, 6, 7.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of the essence and origin of virtue adopted by the school of Utilitarians, 7-9.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Views of the Utilitarians of, 12.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Association of ideas in which virtue becomes the supreme object of our affections, 27.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Impossibility of virtue bringing pleasure if practised only with that end, 35, 36.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The utility of virtue not denied by intuitive moralists, 39.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The degrees of virtue and vice do not correspond to the degrees of utility, or the reverse, 53.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The rewards and punishments of conscience, 59, 60.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The self-complacency of virtuous men, 64, 65, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The motive to virtue, according to Shaftesbury and Henry More, 76.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Analogies of beauty and virtue, 77.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their difference, 78.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Diversities existing in our judgments of virtue and beauty, 79, 80.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virtues to which we can and cannot apply the term beautiful, 82.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The standard, though not the essence, of virtue, determined by the condition of society, 109.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Summary of the relations of virtue to public and private interest, 117.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Emphasis with which the utility of virtue was dwelt upon by Aristotle, 124.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Growth of the gentler virtues, 132.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Forms of the virtue of truth, industrial, political, and philosophical, 137.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Each stage of civilisation is specially appropriate to some virtue, 147.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>National virtues, 151.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virtues, naturally grouped together according to principles of affinity or congruity, 153.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Distinctive beauty of a moral type, 154.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rudimentary
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
virtues differing in different ages, nations, and classes, 154, 155.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Four distinct motives leading men to virtue, 178-180.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plato's fundamental proposition that vice is to virtue what disease is to health, 179.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Stoicism the best example of the perfect severance of virtue and self-interest, 181.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Teachings of the Stoics that virtue should conceal itself from the world, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And that the obligation should be distinguished from the attraction of virtue, 186.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The eminent characteristics of pagan goodness, 190.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>All virtues are the same, according to the Stoics, 192.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Horace's description of a just man, 197.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Interested and disinterested motives of Christianity to virtue, ii. <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Decline of the civic virtues caused by asceticism, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of this change on moral philosophy, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The importance of the civic virtues exaggerated by historians, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Intellectual virtues, <ref target='Pg188'>188</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of monachism to these virtues, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vitalius, St., legend of, and the courtesan, ii. <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vivisection, ii. <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Approved by Bacon, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Volcanoes, how regarded by the early monks, ii. <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vultures, why made an emblem of nature by the Egyptians, i. 108, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>War, its moral grandeur, i. 95.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The school of the heroic virtues, 173.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Difference between foreign and civil wars, 232.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Antipathy of the early Christians to a military life, ii. <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Belief in battle being the special sphere of Providential interposition, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of the military triumphs of the Mohammedans, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influences of Christianity upon war considered, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Improved condition of captives taken in war, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warburton, on morals, i. 15, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 17, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Waterland, on the motives to virtue and cause of our love of God, quoted, i. 9, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>, 15, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wealth, origin of the desire to possess, i. 23.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Associations leading to the desire for, for its own sake, 25</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Western Empire, general sketch of the moral condition of the, ii. <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Widows, care of the early Church for, ii. <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Will, freedom of the human, sustained and deepened by the ascetic life, ii. <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wine, forbidden to women, i. 93, 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Witchcraft, belief in the reality of, i. 363.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Suicide common among witches, ii. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Wollaston, his analysis of moral judgments, i. 76</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Women, law of the Romans forbidding women to taste wine, i. 93, 94, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Standards of female morality of the Jews, Greeks, and Romans, 103, 104.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Virtues and vices growing out of the relations of the sexes, 143.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Female virtue, 143.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effects of climate on this virtue, 144.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Of large towns, 146.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And of early marriages, 145.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Reason for Plato's advocacy of community of wives, 200.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Plutarch's high sense of female excellence, 244.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Female gladiators at Rome, 281, and <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relations of female devotees with the anchorites, ii. <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Their condition in savage life, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Cessation
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
of the sale of wives, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Rise of the dowry, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Establishment of monogamy, <ref target='Pg278'>278</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doctrine of the Fathers as to concupiscence, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Nature of the problem of the relations of the sexes, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Prostitution, <ref target='Pg282'>282-284</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Recognition in Greece of two distinct orders of womanhood&mdash;the wife and the hetæra, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condition of Roman women, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legal emancipation of women in Rome, <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Unbounded liberty of divorce, <ref target='Pg306'>306</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Amount of female virtue in Imperial Rome, <ref target='Pg308'>308-312</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Legislative measures to repress sensuality, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>To enforce the reciprocity of obligation in marriage, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>And to censure prostitution, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Influence of Christianity on the position of women, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Marriages, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Second marriages, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Low opinion of women, produced by asceticism, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The canon law unfavourable to their proprietary rights, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg339'>339</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Barbarian heroines and laws, <ref target='Pg341'>341-344</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Doctrine of equality of obligation in marriage, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The duty of man towards woman, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condemnation of transitory connections, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Roman concubines, <ref target='Pg351'>351</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The sinfulness of divorce maintained by the Church, <ref target='Pg350'>350-353</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Abolition of compulsory marriages, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Condemnation of mixed marriages, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg354'>354</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Education of women, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Relation of Christianity to the female virtues, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Comparison of male and female characteristics, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>The Pagan and Christian ideal of woman contrasted, <ref target='Pg361'>361-363</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Conspicuous part of woman in the early Church, <ref target='Pg363'>363-365</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Care of widows, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Worship of the Virgin, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref>, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Effect of the suppression of the conventual system on women, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref>.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Revolution going on in the employments of women, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenocrates, his tenderness, ii. <ref target='Pg163'>163</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophanes, his scepticism, i. 162</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Xenophon, his picture of Greek married life, ii. <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zadok, the founder of the Sadducees, i. 183, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeno, vast place occupied by his system in the moral history of man, i. 171.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His suicide, 212.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zeus, universal providence attributed by the Greeks to, i. 161</l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
